ASTR 160 - Lecture 1 - Introduction
Chapter 2. Topics of the Course [00:05:38]
All right, the particular topics that are under discussion, I've listed them here in green. The first of them are extra-solar planets[a], by which I mean planets around stars other than the Sun. It's well known that there are many, many of these planets. All you have to do is watch Star Trek or something like that and you'll find many, many examples and this has been a staple of science fiction for quite a long time. Oddly enough, until ten years ago, there was absolutely no evidence for this. We assumed that, because the stars are normal stars and there are many other stars--the Sun is a normal star and there are many other stars like the Sun that there must be many planets of the same kind as the planets in our own Solar System[b] circling around all these other stars. But until 1995 there was not one bit of evidence to support that idea. Since 1995, this has become a huge growth industry and research, and we now know of literally hundreds of planets, all of them discovered in the last ten years. So, this is a situation in which, what ten years ago was science fiction, has become science fact and we're very rapidly trying to figure out exactly what kinds of planets these are, whether there are Earth-like planets out there, and that has some bearing on what the science fiction people refer to when they say as, "life as we know it." And so, that's currently one of the hottest topics in astronomy.
The next topic is going to be black hole[c]s, and this is a similar situation. Fifteen, twenty years ago black holes were sort of poised precariously on the boundary between theoretical physics[d] and science fiction. A boundary that is more porous than you might believe. But again, in the past fifteen years or so this has been converted into a standard topic in observational astronomy. There are dozens, probably hundreds of objects we can point to in the sky and say, "yes those things are black holes." And so now, the current topic of research is do these things that we are pretty sure are black holes actually behave in the incredibly bizarre, science-fictiony manner that the theoretical physicists have been talking about for the past thirty or forty years. So, to what extent are these very exotic behaviors actually manifested in real life?
Finally, I want to talk a little bit about cosmology. Cosmology is the study of the Universe as a whole. That's too big a topic to go into in depth, so I've picked one piece of it. The piece I've picked is the existence, which was discovered in the late 1990s, of something called "dark energy[e]." Dark energy is an all-pervading anti-gravity; it's a repulsive force that turns out to occupy essentially all of the Universe, and 75% or more of the entire mass energy[f] of the Universe[g] turns out to be in the form of this mysterious dark energy. The evidence for this comes largely, but not entirely, from observations of a certain kind of supernova. And so what I'm going to focus on is the observations of the supernovae and how they demonstrated that, in fact, all ordinary matter and energy and so forth is a tiny fraction of what's actually going on in the Universe, and what's really happening out there is something we totally don't begin to understand. So, that will be the third topic of the course.
These topics have something in common. All of them involve observing something that you can't actually see directly. We don't see these planets directly because they're too faint and too far away. We don't see black holes directly. By the definition of black hole you can't see these things directly. And of course, dark energy, by its very name, is also undetectable. So, how do we know that these things are there? The answer is we know that they're there because of their influence on other objects that we can see, and in particular, their gravitational influence on other objects that we can see. And so, what binds these three topics together, are first of all, the fact that the observational techniques to discover them are actually quite similar to each other. And second, that they all involve different manifestations of gravity. And so, we'll be talking in the first part of the course about Newtonian gravity. In the second part of the course when we get to black holes, that's relativistic gravity, general relativity[h], Newton's--Einstein's theory which supplanted Newton's theory. And then by the time we get to dark energy, it may not even be correctly described by Einstein's work, and we may be in the area of whole new kinds of physics that the theorists haven't even thought about yet. So, there will be a progression to more and more sophisticated theories of gravity underlying these observations.
There's another feature that these topics have in common, and that is that they can be understood in some detail without particularly sophisticated mathematics. Now, let me pause here and say some things about math. Astronomy is a mathematical topic. There will be math in this course, there ought to be math in any astronomy course or it isn't really an astronomy course, it's just a slide show. Now, the math in this course has been kept at a deliberately low level. That is to say, the kind of math we'll be doing is stuff you did in ninth and tenth grade. Introductory high school algebra, high school geometry, I think we take the sine of an angle a couple of times, but it's the one case it cancels out almost immediately, so don't let that scare you. It's the kind of thing that you all did on the math SATs and since you're all sitting in this room you must have done okay.
Having said that, I have discovered that saying that is misleading. And the reason it's misleading is cast your mind back to ninth grade; ninth grade math is hard. Remember? In particular, word problems are hard. You remember word problems. This is where you drive from here to Cleveland and you fill your tank up with gas, and the gas costs so much per gallon, and the question is what is your shoe size or something. [laughter] The way one approaches that is through a kind of common sense approach which involves the fact that many of us have been in a car, driving from City A to City B, perhaps not Cleveland, but somewhere else, and so you have a kind of intuition to fall back on. When you do math problems that are logically the same, but apply to astrophysical systems, for which you have absolutely no common sense to back you up, then you have to reason purely from the internal logic of the problem and that's hard to do. It's a skill that can be learned; it's a skill that's worth learning; it's a skill that I'm sure many of you already have to a large extent, but it isn't an easy thing. So, the fact that the level of the math is low doesn't mean that the problems are easy. We do have a lot of help mechanisms, which I'll describe perhaps on Thursday, to keep you up to speed if you start having trouble with these things.
Chapter 4. Planetary Orbits[i] [00:21:03]
Let me, in general, encourage you to ask questions. I know that that's hard to do in a big lecture setting, but we have an advantage over other courses, particularly science courses. We're not trying to prepare you for the astronomy part of the MCATs, so we don't have to cover a specific syllabus. We're not even trying to follow a textbook. And so we have a little more leeway than is ordinarily true to ask questions and go in weird directions, so please feel free to do that. I reserve the right to put a question off into the future or into discussion section or something, but do by all means ask. We have some freedom of action. Yes?
Great, let's start. This is very cool. All right, this is going to be all kinds of fun. Planets, planets around other stars, but planets in general. So, let's start by talking a little bit about orbits, planetary orbits. You probably know some of this story, originally in the old days, people used to think that the Earth was the center of the Universe. So, the Earth was at the middle and planets went around them in circles. That's not much of a circle [drawing on overhead], but you know what I mean. And so, everything was circles around the Earth. And that's what planets did, where planets also included to their way of thinking, the Sun and the Moon as well, and so you had these circles around the Earth. This is what's called the geocentric model[j]; Earth at the middle. It's associated with the name of a Greek astronomer named Ptolemy. The problem with this model is very simple. Namely, that if you actually go out and observe where the planets, and the Sun, and the Moon are night after night after night it doesn't work very well. So, this doesn't fit the observations. Doesn't fit observations.
So, they said, all right well maybe that doesn't work all that well, so what we'll do is instead of imagining that the planets are on circles around the Earth, we'll imagine that there are circles on circles around the Earth, and the planets go on those. So, you add a kind of extra circle here, so the circle goes around the Earth and the planet goes around on that circle. These circles were called epicycles[k]. So, add epicycles. And what happened is they would add an epicycle and then they'd go out and observe some more, and in particular, the Arab astronomers a thousand years ago. A thousand years ago the center of all science was in the Arab countries; they gave us all their--all our star names by the way are in Arabic, so are mathematical techniques such as algebra; it all comes from the Arabs. They knew what they were doing back then when the Europeans were kind of in squalor. And they made these great observations, and every time they made more observations it turned out it didn't fit. So, they had to add more epicycles. So then, they added one here, and one here, and so on until you had circles, and circles, and circles, and circles in order to explain the observations. So, add epicycles repeatedly. And this is kind of unsatisfying because it's not a good thing where every time you get more or better observations you have to revise and extend your theory.
That's not such a great theory. In fact, the word epicycles has now become a kind of a swear word in the scientific community, meaning a sort of theory that has become so complex it's just ridiculous and you don't want to believe it anymore. So, someone will come up with some really seemingly sophisticated but very complicated theory and if you don't like that you just go that's just epicycles, forget about it. So, this has become a little bit of a swear word, and it was unsatisfactory at the time. Now, let me pause for a moment and confess that the story I've just told you, which is the standard story about Ptolemaic epicycles is, well, it has what I think Colbert would refer to as "truthiness." It's a commonly told story that people like to believe, but if you talk to the historians of science this isn't actually how it happened. And, in fact, this idea of circles on circles, on circles that isn't the way epicycles worked, they had circles and they did get more complicated every time they fit the observations, but not by adding more and more circles. They would move the circles side to side, they would have things going at variable speeds around the circle, all sorts of things but this little picture that I've just drawn here has a kind of "truthiness" to it. I would say that this is a general issue with the way scientists describe how science works.
We tell these nice anecdotes and we put them in the textbooks too; in the little bars that go down the side of the textbook, where you get the head and shoulder shot of the famous dead white male scientist and so forth. And then we tell these stories. And the historians of science hate this because it isn't actually what happened. Nevertheless, we persist in telling these stories, and I've been thinking about why that is. I think the way to think about this is what these stories are, are fables. And like any fable, the point is not that the story is true. The point is that it vividly illustrates a moral, which tells you how to behave or how not to behave and they're useful for that reason. You'll recall the famous fable of the ant and the grasshopper. Grasshopper sings and plays and dances all summer long. The ant is very industrious, piles up food, doesn't have any fun. But then in the winter, the grasshopper starves and the ant does fine. If an entomologist were to come along and say but that's not how ants and grasshoppers behave, you would correctly say that he's missed the whole point. And the point is that it's just a nice story which illustrates certain kinds of behaviors and whether they're good or bad. So, here's what I'm going to do; I'm going to tell these stories, but I'm going to label them fables and I'm going to point out the morals explicitly. And the optional paper is going to be: go and take any one of these things and find out what really happened and comment somewhat on the implications of the real story for science.
I should say that the biggest of these fables is probably the one about Galileo and the Catholic Church, where the Catholic Church oppresses the pioneering scientist and the scientist stands firm against this huge impersonal bureaucracy, and the establishment trying to squelch them and so forth. The truth of that is actually very subtle and very interesting and I can't go into it now, among other things because I'm not a historian of science, I'm not the best person to talk about it, but check that out sometime.
Anyway, for this particular--this is the fable of the Ptolemaic epicycles and the moral is that simple theories are better. And you particularly don't like theories which get more and more complicated, the better and better your data become. I should say that the word simple in there turns out to have a technical meaning if you take a statistics course. What I mean by simple is something that has relatively few free parameters. I'll just leave that at that. You can go talk to the statisticians about it. So, if your theory is getting overwhelmed by epicycles, then you'd better go out and come up with some other better theory. And so, people tried to do that, and the first step along the way was, of course, Copernicus.
Copernicus, as you probably recall, decides that the geocentric model is wrong, things ought to be heliocentric; the Sun in the middle. So, you put the Sun in the middle and everything, including the Earth, goes in circles around the Sun. This was revolutionary, and in fact, the title of the book he published was De Revolutionibus Orbium Coelestium, which means "of the revolutions" in the sense of "revolving of the celestial spheres." The use of that word revolution is one of the things that pushed the word revolution to its current meaning, meaning overthrowing authority in some ways. Originally, it just meant to revolve but this was so revolutionary that people started to use the word in the other way. This wasn't actually as great a theory as you might think, because it still needed epicycles. Not as big, not as many, but it didn't get rid of the problem with epicycles. And that didn't work itself out until a generation or two later when Kepler came along.
Kepler was a famous astronomer and he had in his possession, because he stole them, the best naked-eye results that had ever been obtained of the motions of the planets, in particular, Mars. He described these motions in Three Laws of Planetary Motion[l]. You can look them all up in a textbook. In other kinds of courses we would have you memorize these things; I'm not going to do that. The key point here is that these are not circles; they're ellipses around the Sun. That, it turns out, gives you a model for planetary orbits which, when you take better and better data, doesn't change. They're still ellipses; you don't need little ellipses on top of these ellipses to explain everything that's going on. So, this now has excellent descriptive power. It really describes what's going on, and when you make further observations, it still describes what's going on. It does not have any explanatory power in the sense that if you say, "why ellipses?" Kepler had no idea. That's just the way God made it. So, it's not in any particular way an explanation. For the explanation you have to wait another generation or two until we get Newton.
Chapter 5. From Newton's Laws[m] of Motion to the Theory of Everything[n] [00:31:32]
Newton writes down three laws of his own, but these are now three laws of motion, not planetary motion in particular. And again, one could write these down and memorize them and learn them, and that would be a good thing. Let me write down one of them, the Second Law, looks like this: F = ma, force equals mass times acceleration. And I write this one down simply to point out that that equation is the entire intellectual content of Introductory Physics for physics majors. If you go take Physics 180 this is all that they do and they spend the whole time. It turns out you don't actually want acceleration, that doesn't tell you what you want to know. What you want to know is the trajectory, where the object is as a function of time. Those of you who have taken some calculus may recall that if you take the acceleration, and you take an integral twice, you'd come up with the position as a function of time. So here's what--so in the next thirty seconds I'm going to explain Physics 180 to you. You substitute in some kind of a force, you divide by mass, you take two integrals, and that gives you the trajectory of the thing. That's all you need to know. Technically, of course, it's quite hard, but conceptually pretty straight-forward.
One of the things that Newton did with this equation was he took a particular force, namely the force of gravity, which he also wrote down a Law of Gravity[o]. That tells you for any given situation what the force due to gravity is, substituted it in here, and figured out what the motions of the planets ought to be. And it turns out that he could derive Kepler's Laws[p]. He derives Kepler's Laws. Very nice. Now, of course, in order to do this he has to invent calculus, so it takes a little while. He was a great genius but even so, inventing calculus from scratch, not something you want to attempt at home. And that was basically the start of both modern science and modern mathematics.
So, this marks the start of science in the following sense--that Newton has to make a couple assumptions along the way, sort of deep assumptions about how the world works. One is that the Universe is governed by laws, and in fact, by universal laws[q]. What I mean by universal, in this sense, is that they apply everywhere; that the same law of gravity that resulted in the top of my pen falling to the floor over there also is responsible for the orbits of the planets and the motions of the stars. This was a new idea. It's very familiar to us by now, but the idea that the planets ought to behave according to the same rules as stuff down here on Earth was a whole new concept. The other piece of the new concept is that these laws are mathematical in nature. This is why science is hard, because it's hard for human beings. I think it's something to do with the way our brains are wired, to accept that this is true. It's very easy to imagine a world in which that's not true. Go read any fantasy novel. Any fantasy novel has a situation where the hero or the villain, by virtue of their strength of character influences the events around them. So that is a rule governed by laws, perhaps, that are not mathematical in nature, but depend on the moral character of the individuals involved. Every human culture has such stories including our own. It's very hard to get away from it, and the idea that there's just this sort of mathematical structure and that your moral stature has no bearing on what's going to happen is kind of hard to accept. Fortunately, people turn out to be pretty good at math, so we can actually solve these problems and move forward. These two ideas were revolutionary and they are the basis pretty much of all science.
So then Newton's laws get elaborated on for several centuries. By the end of the nineteenth century things are starting to come apart a little bit. There are now problems that show up with Newtonian physics[r]. It's been a big success on the whole but there are now problems. And in the early twentieth century what happens is two new laws of physics are invented. These are the given the names quantum mechanics[s] and general relativity. And the situation with these is they don't overturn Newton's laws, they extend them. It turns out that in the kinds of situations that Newton was looking at, both quantum mechanics and general relativity, reduced down to Newton's law. So, you have a situation where here are Newton's laws, Ns Laws, of which Kepler's laws are a tiny subset. And then general relativity; I'm drawing a kind of Venn diagram here, is here, relativity, occupying Newton's laws but that's some other stuff. Quantum mechanics looks kind of like this; extends in a different direction. Let me make these axes-specific. I don't like Venn diagrams when they don't tell you what you're actually plotting. This is mass, so heavy things are when relativity kicks in. This is size, and so small things are when quantum mechanics kicks in.
But you can see the problem. We've got two big theories. You really want those theories to be encompassed by one yet bigger theory. And that is the current goal of theoretical physics, to try and find the one great theory that encompasses both quantum mechanics and general relativity, which contradict each other in various awkward ways, particularly in this region up here. This is called the Theory of Everything, or TOE. And the best current guess as to what kind of a theory that will be is that it will be some kind of string theory[t]. I won't go into string theories now, you can go read many popular books on this; it's very exciting. There is currently no string theory that really works out all that well but the people who are studying this kind of thing like to believe that that's going to work out sometime in the future. This is good.
Chapter 6. The Newtonian Modification of Kepler's Third Law [00:38:10]
We've gone about forty minutes from the start of science to the Theory of Everything, so we're done. Everything else is a detail and so the whole rest of the course is filling in details. The first of which--so let's start on the details. The first of which, I want to go back and catch one of Kepler's Laws. And I want to write down the Newtonian Modification of Kepler's Third Law. That is an equation that looks like this:

a3 = GMP2/4 π2

We're going to circle this in red. This is something you're going to want to memorize. This, it turns out to be, a basis of a large fraction of what we're going to do in this course. So, let me explain the symbols; a is the semi-major axis[u] of an elliptical orbit. Remember these orbits are going to be ellipses; here's an ellipse. The long side is the major axis; the short side is the minor axis. Half the major axis is the semi-major axis, so this is a right here. P is the orbital period[v], how long it takes the planet or whatever orbiting object you've got to go around one orbit. M is the total mass of the two things in orbit around each other, of the orbiting bodies. And the existence of that M is why this is Newton's modification. In Kepler's law, it was always planets going around the Sun, so the mass was always the same; the mass was that of the Sun and so it cancelled out. In general, you can use the same equation to deal with things orbiting the Earth or things orbiting the Moon as long as you put in the right mass there. G is a constant of nature, the gravitational constant, and it equals some value depending on what units you use. And we'll come back to that later. Four is 4, π is this obscure number from elementary mathematics 3.14159 whatever the heck it is. And you can punch it in on your calculator or whatever. So, you can use this equation to find things out.
Now, these numbers tend to be awkward to work with. The mass of the Sun[w] is some huge number of kilograms, G is a very awkward number, π is always a mess. But let me show you a trick. Consider the Earth's orbit[x] around the Sun. The semi-major axis of the Earth's orbit is a very common unit in astronomy, and it's called an Astronomical Unit[y]. It's a unit of length, or AU. The mass of the Sun, mass of the Earth plus the Sun is mostly the mass of the Sun; of Sun, is called the solar mass obviously, and it's given this symbol M with a little circle with a dot inside, that's the symbol for the Sun. What's the orbital period of the Earth? A year, thank you very much. Period of Earth--one year. That's what a year means; it takes a year for the Earth to go around the Sun. So, it must be the case that one Astronomical Unit cubed, is equal to Gtimes the mass of the Sun, times one year squared, that's P2 over π2.
Now, let me show you a trick. Take the general equation, it's a useful trick, and divide by the specific equation. So a3 =P2GM/ π2 and we're going to divide that by 1 AU3 equals one year squared, G mass of the Sun over 4π 2. We can do this because these two things are equal so we're dividing both sides of the equation by the same amount. G cancels, 4π 2cancels; that's very nice. We end up with a over 1 AU3 equals P over one year squared, M over the solar mass. This is just saying that quantity is a in units of an Astronomical Unit. This quantity is P in units of a year. If this is two years then this number will come out to 2, and this is M in units of the mass of the Sun. So, you can say a3 = P2M, providing you're dealing in units of the mass of the Sun, units of one year, and units of an AU. So, this is now much easier to work with. You've got rid of all kinds of terrible things, so let me give you the first numerical example of the course. This will be the last thing we do today, namely, the orbit of Jupiter.
Turns out the distance from Jupiter to the Sun is about five times the distance of the Earth to the Sun. So, a of Jupiter is approximately five times a, a of Earth; a of Earth you'll recall is this 1 AU so this is about 5 AU. So, how does this equation work out? You get 53 equals P2M, M is the mass of the Sun, 1 solar mass. And since Jupiter is going around the Sun that's equal to 1. So, you have 53, 5 times 5 is 25, 25 times 5 is 125, so you end up with 125 equals P2, so you can answer the question now. What is the orbital period of Jupiter in years? Obviously, that's going to equal the square root of 125. Here's another trick. What's the square root of 125? Quickly? Good, more decimals? You could type it into your calculator though and find out, but let me make a suggestion. Don't take the square root of 125; take the square root of 121 instead. What's the square root of 121? 11. Much easier, right? And notice this, a of Jupiter is approximately five, so 53 is approximately 125, and it's just as good to say 121 is equal to the square root--the square of the period, and Pequals 11 years. That's the orbital period of Jupiter.
All right, so now, I'm aware that many of you are shopping the course today and may not be back for future lectures. And so, I want for those people who have decided against this that they'll do something far more worthwhile with their time, I want to leave you with something you can carry through your life from your brief experience with Astronomy 160. And that is the following piece of advice: Don't take the square root of 125, take the square root of 121. It's much easier. This is what the business people call thinking outside the box. Don't do the stupid hard thing. Do the thing that is just as good but requires some thought first in order to make it easy. So, I will leave you with that, the rest of you I'll see you on Thursday morning.
[end of transcript]
ASTR 160 - Lecture 2 - Planetary Orbits
Chapter 2. Exoplanets[z] [00:06:15]
Let me remind you what we had started to talk about. The class is organized into three fairly specific topics. The first of which is extrasolar planets. Planets around stars other than the Sun. Exoplanets, so-called. That's our topic. One of the things that I pointed out last time is that, surprisingly enough, very--until ten years ago none of these were known. And it's only a very recent development that there's any actual evidence that these things exist. So, one question you might ask is why are these things so hard to find? The science fiction folks seem to have no trouble; they just sort of go around in their spaceships and find these things all over the place.
And to consider that question let me show you a picture. Here's a picture of a star. This is the star Sirius. It's the brightest. It's a blowup obviously of a photograph plus a little Photoshopped [computer program to edit photos] arrow. That's not a celestial object [laughter]. So, this is a blowup of a photograph of the star Sirius. Sirius is the brightest star in the sky to the--easily visible with the naked eye. In fact, as I say, the brightest star. It's one of the closest stars. It's a little bit brighter than the Sun intrinsically, but it's ten light years away or so.
And let me comment on a couple features of this picture. First of all, you can see the star covers a fair amount of area on this blown up picture, but that has nothing to do with the actual size or shape of the star itself. It's not like it's a big round ball with spikes coming off it. That's not what's happening. In fact, if you had perfect optics and perfect vision, this star would be a point basically so small you couldn't resolve it right in the middle here. That's the physical extent of the star at this scale. It's something like this [pointing to photo], and you wouldn't be able to see it at all.
The reason it's extended is for two reasons; first of all, the atmosphere distorts--this was a ground-based picture, the atmosphere distorts how you see the star, and in particular, it's like looking up from the bottom of a swimming pool. There's distortion in the atmosphere and it makes the stars seem to jump around. And so if you take a long photographic exposure[aa] of something the star has been jumping around during the exposure and it smears out the image. Plus also, the optics of the telescope aren't perfect, and these spiky things here are due to the optics of the telescope. This sort of--there are all these spikes and that has to do with how one of the mirrors of the telescope is held up. So, the combination of optics and atmosphere sort of spreads out the light by a whole bunch. This is always the case even when you're doing observations from space.
Now, the little arrow here is pointing at a little bump off in the side, but you might not have thought anything more of than you did about these spikes. But in fact, that's not a property of optics; there's actually something there. That's an object in orbit around Sirius. And you might think that this is the way you would go about finding planets orbiting other stars. It would look kind of like this. Here's a great big star; there's a planet. And if you watch this thing over a course of many years, you actually see the position of this point move around. It's because it's in orbit. It's in about a forty-year orbit. Here's the thing. This isn't a planet. It's another star. This is another star somewhat fainter than this [pointing to the photo of Sirius]. A planet would be 10,000 times fainter than this thing, but probably in about the same relative position to this.
Now, picture all this light, all this mess from this star, and try to find something right here that's 10,000 times fainter than this. That's the problem. The problem is that planets are relatively faint things. That, in itself isn't catastrophic. We have big telescopes; we can see pretty faint things. It's just they are faint things that are really near to things that are bright, and so basically, the problem with finding planets around other stars is the same as trying to find stars in the sky during the daytime. Why can't you see the stars during the daytime? Because the background of the sky is much, much brighter than the stars are. Similarly, if you had a little planet here you wouldn't be able to distinguish it from the atmospheric distortions and the optical distortions[ab] caused by the telescope that takes this picture. So, the problem is you've got stuff that's faint near things that are bright, and the bright things have all kinds of distortions on them anyway, and so you wouldn't be able to figure out what actually is a planet.
So, just to summarize this, the problem is not that the planets are too faint, although they are quite faint. The problem is that the planets are too close to the star. That prompts--we've got to quantify this statement I think and so the question arises, "Well how close is it?" That leads into a discussion, which we already started last time, of planetary orbits. If you want to answer that question in any quantitative sort of way. You will recall that in the last class I wrote down an important equation of--regarding planetary orbits, that looks like this: a3 = P2M, where this [M] is the mass of the objects in orbit around each other in units of solar masses[ac]. This [P2] is the orbital period in units of years. And this [a3] is--orbits you will recall are ellipses, and this is the so-called semi-major axis of the ellipse in units called Astronomical Units, which is the distance from the Earth to the Sun. Or the semi-major axis of the Earth-Sun orbit, more properly. So, that's in a particular set of units.
Chapter 3. Physical Units and Significant Digits [00:12:56]
Before going on, let me make a couple general remarks about equations. First thing to say about equations is there's this idea that equations, mathematics, is some terribly different language, not at all. This is an English sentence. The sentence reads A cubed is equal to P squared times M, period. If you wrote this down in a textbook you'd actually see they put the period in there. It's got a verb, is equal to, it's got a subject, it's got an object. All this is is a different way of writing stuff down. So, it's not a different language; it's just a different writing system, that's all. So, don't freak out, that's the first thing. It's just ordinary English. The second thing to say is that this is a physics equation and not a math equation, and that's actually a subtler point. You will recall back in eighth-grade algebra when they started writing down X is equal to whatever X was equal to. And they said, you know, the amazingly cool thing about algebra is that X could be anything. That's why it's so powerful, and so you can solve whole classes of problems all at once just by letting X equal something unknown.
That's math; physics--it isn't true. It is not the case that this equation is true regardless of what a is, or regardless of whatP is. This is only true for very specific meanings of those quantities. And the amazing thing about the Universe is it turns out that math equations apply in very specific physical situations. This didn't have to be true. Either that you could express physical things in mathematical equations, and that math and physics would have anything to do with each other. And it is different to have a physics equation than to have a math equation because it has to be so specific. If you substitute something that isn't the semi-major axis in for a, then that equation isn't true anymore. It seems kind of obvious, I know, but worth keeping in mind.
The other thing is that physics equations tend to have units associated with them. Not always, but most of the time. And so that's why it's so important to say, well, this is true not only if M stands for mass but also if mass is expressed in a particular set of units, in this case solar masses. You'll recall from last time that this is actually a specific version of a slightly more general equation which looks like this: a3 = P2GM/4π2, where G is a constant that depends on what units you're using. And last time I derived this equation from that. But another way of saying it is if you choose your units to be solar masses, years, and astronomical units; then G is equal to 4π2 and so it cancels out. That's another way of thinking about why this specific version of the equation works out.
All right. So, once you've got your physics equation, what are you supposed to do with it? Well, the first thing you should do is take a careful look at it and figure out what kinds of problems you can solve. This, again, is fairly straight-forward, obvious stuff. If you've got a3 = P2M, there are obviously three different problems you can solve. If you know a and M you can compute P, right? If you know a and P you can compute M. And if you know P and M you can compute a. So, you know two of these things, you find out the third. This problem--an example of this problem we did last time. We had--we solved for the orbital period of Jupiter by knowing how far away from the Sun it is and what the mass of the Sun is. So, like Jupiter last time.
So, let's do another one of these examples just quickly here. What is the mass of the Sun? So, that's obviously this version of the problem [if you know a and M you can compute P]. And so, what we're going to do is we're going to takea and P from the Earth's orbit. Use Earth's orbit to determine the mass of the Sun. And this is, in fact, how one goes about determining the mass of the Sun. So, let's use this in the units we have, a = 1 Astronomical Unit for the Earth. P is equal to 1 year for the Sun. 13 = 12 x M. So, M = 1 in units of solar masses. That's not especially surprising, right? Not particularly illuminating, right? That the mass of the Sun comes out to be one in units of solar masses.
If we use a different set of units this is a more interesting calculation. So, let's use a more standard set of units, this so called mks units, this is meters, kilograms for mass, and seconds for time. All right, so now, turns out an Astronomical Unit is expressed in meters is 150 billion meters, approximately. It looks something like this [150,000,000,000]. And what's a year expressed in seconds? Well, let's see a year is 365.24 days, a day is 24 hours, an hour is 60 minutes, and a minute is 60 seconds, so that's a year expressed in seconds.
And at this point we better pause and get our large numbers straight. You are all probably familiar I imagine with scientific notation[ad]. This becomes very important, otherwise the numbers, as you can clearly see, get completely out of hand. And because it's so important I'm going to tire you by writing down some facts about scientific notation. There's a help sheet on this if you have any trouble but recall how this works. You're supposed to express numbers as in the following form: N times 10m, this [N] is a decimal with one digit out in front of the dot. This [m] is supposed to be an integer, a whole number either positive or negative. And the reason that this is easy to deal with is because of one of the great limitations of the human brain. We only deal well with really small numbers, basically one-digit numbers. If I take a few coins here and I sort of throw them up you immediately know that there are four of them, you don't have to count one, two, three, four to satisfy yourself that there are four coins on this table because we have a concept of fourness, all of us in our minds, and it's clear that this pattern satisfies that concept.
If I threw two coins or six coins, or seven coins you'll probably be okay. If I threw thirteen, you'd start to have real trouble. If there were 271 of them, there's no way you could guess just by looking at them how many there were. You'd have to count them one by one. So, the human brain really only deals well with one-digit numbers and you can tell this because of the names we give to numbers. When you start getting big numbers we call them millions or billions, or trillions and they all sound alike, that's because we can't tell the difference between a million and a trillion, it's just big. So, anytime you get up into big numbers we start to completely lose our grip on what these numbers mean, and you have to have elaborate metaphors; a trillion is a million millions. And if you fill up the Moon with ping-pong balls there are--I don't know. You have to do that kind of mental exercise to get a grip on it. The nice thing about scientific notation is that it turns big numbers into small numbers, right? N is a number between one and nine, m is an integer, it's one of those numbers four, five, six that we can get our minds wrapped around. Recall what this means, right, 10m is 1 with m zeros after it. So, that's the point of scientific notation, it's to take big numbers and allow us to deal with them.
I think this is a really valuable thing and I kind of wish that budget discussions in the political context would take place in scientific notation because people are always making mischief from the fact that all big numbers sound alike. You have congress critters saying things like, "oh terrible disaster," there's a million dollars of waste in the Pentagon budget. The Pentagon budget is $500 billion dollars. One million dollars of waste--that's me dropping a nickel behind the couch on my budget. So that's--nobody would accuse me of being wastefulness if I didn't move the couch and get that nickel out, all right. It's because a million sounds big, and so does 500 billion. We have no real sense of how big these things are relative to each other. But we do have a sense of the difference between 6 and 11, which is the difference in scientific notation between one million dollars and $100 billion dollars, so that's how this works. So, arithmetic rules. Again, there's a help sheet on this if you're rusty.
If you have N times 10m and you multiply it by another scientific notation number, A times 10B, that is equal to A times N (times 10 to the n+m). And the other nice thing about scientific notation is it turns multiplication into addition because the exponents add: A times N to--times 10m plus B. [N x 10m x A x 10B = A x N 10m+B]. Similarly, if you take N times 10m and raise it to the K, that's Nk times 10 to the m times K, so it turns exponentiation into multiplication. So, the nice thing about dealing with exponents is it makes it one kind of arithmetic easier.
So, a specific example of this might be N times 10m, the square root of that which is raising something to the ½ power. This is equal to N½ times 10m/2. That works if m is an even number but if m is an odd number you get a crazy exponent. This really has to be an integer over here. So, what do you do then? You say N times 10m to the ½ is equal to 10 times N times Nm-1 to the ½ power. So, I've just moved a 10 from here over to here, and then that is equal to 10 N to the ½ times 10(m-1)/2. And that's how you recover when you take a square root or something like that. That's how you recover an integer on this side. We'll have lots of practice in this kind of thing.
So, going back to the problem. 1 AU is equal to 1.5 times 1011 meters; 1 year is equal to 2.4 times 101. That's 24 times 6 times 101 times, 6 times 101, times 3.6524 times 102 seconds. All right, so let's do that one, two, three, four, five--2.4 times 6 times, 6 times 3.6 times 105 to the 5; 2.5 times 6 is around 15, 15 times 6 is around 90, 90 is a little less than 100, 3.6 a little more than 6. Those two things multiplied together is around 300. And 300 times 105 is equal to 3 times 107. So, there are around 3 times 107 seconds in 1 year. That's a good number to remember.
In mks units, G is this magical constant, is something like 7 times 10-11. That's an approximation. It's actually 6.6 something, something, something times 10-11, but we'll call it 7. So, now we're in a position to calculate what the solar mass is in kilograms. So remember a3 equal to GMP squared over 4π2. So, let's see, 1.5 times 1011; that's an astronomical unit cubed. P squared, 3 times 107; that's 1 year squared; 7 times 10-11 that's G over M over 4π2. I'm going to do the arithmetic really fast. I would like you to learn how to do this yourself rather than relying on calculators so this is an example. Let me blaze through this at warp speed; then we'll stop and consider what's happened.
All right. On the right-hand side, 32 is--that's 32 times 107 times 2 is 14, times 7 times 10-11. M over 4 times π, times π. 32is 10. 10 times 1014 is 1015. And so on the top we've got 1015 times 7, times 10-11. 15 minus 11 is 4 so that's 7 times 104on top. π times π is 10 that's 40. 4 times 10 to the 1 on the bottom, 7 divided by 4 is 2, and so that's 2 times 103 times m. Good, left-hand side, all right 1.5 times, 1.5 times, 1.5, that's 1.53 times 1033, why 33? That's 11 times 3. 1.5 times 1.5 that's a little bit more than 2. If you multiply something that's a little bit more than 2 by something that's a little bit less than 2 that's 4, and so this is 4 times 1033. Now we want m, right? So we've got to divide both sides by 2 times 103; m is equal to 4 halves times 1033 over 103. That's 10-33 minus 3. That's 2 times 1030 kilograms, got to put the units in. Okay, how we doing? Questions, comments, abuse. Yes sir?
Student: How accurate is that number?
Professor Charles Bailyn: How accurate is that number? It's accurate to about one digit, which is why I only wrote down one digit of accuracy out front. This is a pro--excellent question thank you very much. This is appropriate because remember I'm using 7 times 10 minus 11 for G, where it's actually 6.6. So, I'm already about 10% off from there. I did my little calculation to come up with one year equals 3 times 107 seconds. That's about accurate to one digit or so. And so the whole thing is done to one digit accuracy. If you're dealing with one digit accuracy, it is true that 7 divided by 4 is 2. It really is true, because if that wasn't true, then you would have to have more digits on your unit for G or something like that. In particular, let me make an official rule for this course. Three equals π, equals the square root of 10, all right. That will solve an enormous amount of arithmetic problems and it will not get you into any serious trouble. So, we don't have to worry about the .14159 and however many more digits you all memorized it to. And when you multiply it together you get ten. Yes?
Student: Are you expecting this kind of calculation for problem sets?
Professor Charles Bailyn: Yes. The question was, "Am I expecting this kind of calculation for problem sets?" The answer is "yes." Here's the rule about calculators. Let me put it this way: You can only use calculators if I can't tell that you've done it. So, that means you can check your work to make sure you've it right or something. But if you start coming up with numbers like 7.1516397, that's eight digits of accuracy and I'm pretty sure you haven't worked it out yourself. So important, no calculators on the tests, okay? So, get some practice doing this kind of thing. And this will--this I promise you will be useful to you in everyday life because this is how you catch the politicians doing screwy things with big numbers. You do it in your head in scientific notation and you figure out whether the answer is meaningful or not.
This whole business of significant digits, I think, is badly distorted; by the way, it's taught in high school. In high school you, and also I should say in laboratory courses sometimes at the college level, you often get situations where people say--give you a whole sheet of rules on how to figure out how many significant digits you have. This is nonsense. All you have to do is behave like a human being. We say to each other, I'll meet you in the dining hall in ten minutes. That doesn't mean--that means something different from I'll meet you in the dining hall in eleven minutes and twenty-six seconds. Even if the person happens to show up in the dining hall in exactly eleven minutes and twenty-six seconds. Ten minutes means I'll meet you there in ten minutes, we all know what that means. I'll meet you there in eleven minutes and twenty-six seconds means you're a character in a bad spy novel who's just synchronized his watch. So, this shows up in science fiction too.
I don't know how many of you are Star Trek fans, I certainly am [laughter]. And in all the different Star Trek movies [inaudible comment]--thank you. In all the different--a friend [referring to person who made comment]. In all the different Star Trek movies there's always a second in command who isn't a human being, right? A Vulcan or an android or some damn thing or another. And to emphasize the non-humanness of these characters, what they do is they make them use too many significant digits. And so that makes them inhuman and so the captain will say, "When are we landing on omicron M?" The second in command will say, "Well, we should assume standard orbit in 2.6395 minutes," emphasizing somehow superior brain power or something. But it's nonsense because it takes the guy ten seconds to say that sentence, so what is this time calculated to a 100th of a second? Does it start from when he begins the sentence? From when he ends the sentence? What's the other end of that time interval? Can you say you assume standard orbit to the 100th of a second? What does that even mean? When you start beaming down? When you end beaming down? Also, keep in mind it takes more than a 100th of second for the sound to travel from his lips to the captain's ears, so the whole thing is just nonsense. And so, you don't need any special rules, just behave like a human being; don't behave like an android. So, no androids. And that's the only rule I'm going to give you [laughter]. These two are the only rules I'm going to give you about significant digits, just do the right thing, okay.
Chapter 4. Calculating the Distance between Planets and Stars [00:33:23]
All right, okay so this is all lovely but we haven't actually started to answer the question we started the class with. Let me remind you where we began this disquisition on numbers. The question was supposed to be how far away from stars are planets? So, we haven't answered the question, when the question was, "How close are planets to stars?" This notation will confuse the people who didn't make it to class today; that's probably just as well too.
All right, how close to planets--are planets to stars? Now, we have a problem because closeness--we usually think of this as being measured with distances. And distances are a serious problem in astronomy. Supposing you--Distance, by the way, is more or less the same thing as size, right? Size is the distance from one side of something to another side of something. So, size and distance are the same. So, supposing you ask the question, "How big is the Moon?" What is the size of the Moon? What is the distance from one side of the Moon to the other? You go out one night and you look up at the Moon and you do this [holding fingers apart], one on each side of the Moon. You say, well, it's about an inch and a half. Now, obviously that's meaningless, because if you had done it here, it would have been about a half inch. And we all know that isn't--that somehow is not the right answer. If you look at the screen over here, for example, and you hold out your hands about eight inches from your--close one eye, hold out--you can try this, hold out your hands about here, you'll find that that screen--the lit part of the screen is about four or five inches across. But if you go closer to your eye, it's only about an inch across. If you're at arm's length it's maybe six, eight inches where I'm standing here. And if you try it at the back of the class, you'll get a different answer from what I just got.
So, distance is a problematical thing. And so--But on the other hand, obviously, the size of the screen hasn't changed depending on where my arms were or whether I'm standing at the back of the room or the front of the room. So, something has to be measurable there, but it isn't distance. What it is, is angle. What you can measure in astronomy are angles. So, here's what you really want to know. Here's a star; here's a planet going around the star, and here is you [draws diagram on overhead]. This is the international symbol for an observer; it's supposed to be a little stylized eyeball. So, this observer is looking at this star-planet system. And looks at the star and looks at the planet. And what you can measure is the angle, which I'm going to call α here. And if you simulate the angle by putting your hands up close to your eye, you'll get a small distance; if you do it further away you'll get a bigger distance. But what you are measuring is the angle. What you would like is a way of being able to convert from that angle into a distance.
And now, the ugly specter of trigonometry rears its head. Because that's what trigonometry is. It's a way of turning angles into distances and vice versa. And you may remember constructions that look vaguely like this; let's put some labels on it. Here's distance 1, here's distance 2, here's distance 3. And this is the definition of sine, the sine of α is equal to the opposite over the hypotenuse[ae], so that's D2 over D3. And now--so that's how you do it. Now, I promised you on Tuesday that the sine was going to cancel out, and so it is. Here's how. If you use small angles it turns out that the sine of α is equal to α, if α is expressed in radians, which is a particular kind of measure of angles. And so for small angles, first of all, the hypotenuse and the longer side are the same length more or less. So, you've got a situation like this where D2 over D1 is equal to α. That is--let's circle that one in red; it's going to be important. That's called the small angle formula[af]. And once again, you have to be careful of the units. And once again, there's two sets of units in which you might possibly use this.
So D2 over D1 is equal to α. If D2 and D1 are in the same units, then α has to be radians. A radian--there are 2π radians in a circle. You'll recall there are 360 degrees in a circle that's how you convert from degrees to radian. But there's a better set of units. It turns out also that if you do this, use this equation D2, /D1, α, and D2 is measured in Astronomical Units, remember those? That's the Earth-Sun distance. And D1 is measured in parsecs[ag], which is equal to 3 times 1016meters; that's about three light years, for those of you counting at home. And α is in arc seconds[ah]. Then it also works out. Let me tell--an arc second, let's see, 60 arc seconds is equal to an arc minute. Just so you know how these units work; 60 arc minutes is equal to 1 degree. So, that's a really small angle. So, it turns out this set of units is particularly useful for these kinds of planet calculations, because distances from planets to stars tend to be a few astronomical units. Distances from us to the nearest star. The nearest star, aside from the Sun, turns out to be about 1 parsec away. So, distances to stars are some number of parsecs. And so, you'll get answers that are a few arc seconds, and this is yet another way of turning big numbers into small numbers. You've used the right set of units so that everything's approximately one. Another way of compensating for the weakness of the human brain.
Okay, so now we can solve a problem. We can actually solve numerically the question of how far away from a star is our planet? So, here's an example. Here's a problem of the kinds that might show up on a problem set. I told you that that object orbiting Sirius has about a forty-year period. So, let's take a planet with a forty-year period; that's kind of between Saturn and Uranus in our own Solar System. Around a star 3 parsecs away; pc means parsecs, whatever they may tell you in the humanities classes. Around a star 3 parsecs away, what is the angular separation? Angular separation, because that's what we can actually measure. We can't measure the distance but we can measure the angle.
Okay, so this is a hard problem, why is it hard? It's hard for two different reasons. First of all, well, you guys know how to solve problems like this. You all went to high school. What you do is you say, okay what do I know? I have P = 40, I haveD = 3, I want α, so I look for an equation with D, P, D and α in it. I shove these two things into--you substitute them in for Pand D, and then I calculate α. And you don't have to actually know anything about anything in order to do that; you just have to have a good set of notes. And you go through all the different equations until you find the equation that contains all the variables you have, and the one that you're asked for. And then you can just plug it in, you don't have to know anything about anything. This won't work, right? Because if you go through the lecture notes thus far, you will not find an equation with P and D and α in it because it's two different equations that you have to put together. And that requires you to actually know what you're doing. And that of course is much harder. So, plug and chug won't work. Chug fails because there's no one equation.
This is a hard problem for another reason, which is that I haven't told you something important. If you try and go through and solve this you will discover that you don't have all the information you need, and in particular, you need to know the total mass of the system, the mass of the star. Most of the mass is in the mass of the star. So, there's missing information. That's one way to make a problem hard, the other way to make a--if I don't tell you everything you need to know, it's a somewhat harder problem. The other way to make a problem hard--this is a classic, be warned--I will do this at some point, is to give you one extra piece of information that you don't need. This screws students up totally because you go looking for the equation that uses the extra piece of information, and there is no such an equation and you don't need it, then you're cast into doubt. I must need this somehow or he wouldn't have given it to me. Nonsense. In real life it is not the case that all problems come to you with all the information you need and only the information that you need. That's not how things work in real life. And it shouldn't be how things work in preparation for real life, which is I guess what classes sort of ought to be. So, missing information, too much information, sometimes although not in this case; I could have told you the temperature of the star, for example. I'll do that. The temperature of Sirius is 10,000 degrees, surface temperature[ai]. So, now I've given you both; I've left out information and told you too much.
All right, so what is the mental process that you need to go through in solving a problem which has these kinds of difficulties associated with it? Okay. So, how to think about such problems? The first thing to notice is what you would do in the ordinary plug and chug. What have you got, what do you need? You have a value for the orbital period, you have a value for the distance, and what you want is an angle. Okay. Now, so this doesn't lead you to where you want to go. The next thing you've got to do is make an assumption. This is a star; all stars are more or less the same. So, let us imagine that this star has a mass more or less similar to that of the Sun. So, the M is approximately equal to a solar mass. How far wrong could you go? In fact, you go wrong by about a factor of two, but at a certain point you're going to take the cube root of two, and so it actually isn't so bad. So suppose M is equal to the mass of the Sun, most stars are approximately. Ah ha, now we're getting somewhere, because now we have M and P. And if you have put that equation--Kepler's Third Law--and interpreted it deeply into your brain, and it has become part of your heart and soul and very being, you will immediately realize that if you have M and P, of course you can calculate a. In fact, you probably realized this first before you make the assumption in step two, because that's why you're interested in the mass, because you realize that if you happened to have M, you would be able to determine a.
Next thing you have to do is, is interpret what this a is; a is the semi-major axis of the orbit of the planet around the star. That's something very close to--very similar to--the distance between the star and the planet is a. So, a in this equation is the same as D2 in the other equation, all right. So, a is D2 and the distance you have up there is the distance from us to that whole system, that's D1. And now, you can compute α, right? That's the thought process. And you may have to go--sort of worry a little bit around here before you have the "ah ha" moment of how to get the problem. This is the moment when you've solved the problem. The key to solving this is to have an instinctive reaction to knowing that you've got a period; namely, if I had a mass I could figure out the semi-major axis. Or if I had the semi-major axis, I could figure out the mass. And that has to click. And the way that clicks is to have this equation really--I was joking before--but really become instinctive in a certain way, and there won't be many equations in this class. But it will really help you to assimilate them in that kind of depth.
All right, so now in the few minutes remaining, let me actually solve this problem numerically. P is equal to 40 years, D is equal to 3 parsecs. Here's something not to do: 40 times 3 times 107, because that'll give you the answer in seconds. No don't do that, because both of the equations would rather have things in Astronomical Units and years and things like that. So a3 equals P2M, M is 1 by assumption, P is 40 so this is 1,600, that's 402 on this side, a3 that's 1.6 times 10 to the 3. Now, we're going to take the cube root of both sides, that's the cube root of 1.6 times, the cube root of 1,000. 3 times a third is equal to 1, conveniently enough. The cube root of 1.6, I don't know that's 1.2 or something but call it 1. So, that's 10, and so it's 10 Astronomical Units. Remember we're doing this in solar masses, years, Astronomical Units. 10 Astronomical Units, that's how far away it is. Now, we can do this [D2/D1] where this is in Astronomical Units, and this down here is in parsecs, and 10 divided by 3 is 3. So, the answer is a is equal to 3 arc seconds.
Now, this is an important result because the--let me go back to this picture. The angular scale over which light is kind of thrown around by the atmosphere and by the optics of the kinds of telescopes we can build is some number of arc seconds. Good ground-based observations, maybe half the light is inside 1 arc second; the rest of the light is scattered all the way out to maybe 10 arc seconds. From space it's a little bit better. But, light from observations of stars is scattered over angular sizes of arc seconds. So, you are guaranteed that there's going to be a bunch of light from the star right on top of where you're looking for your planet. And in fact, it's going to get worse, because one of the things about this equation is D1; the distance to the star.
We did this for Sirius. Sirius is one of the closest stars; it's 3 parsecs away. Most--the center of the galaxy is 8,000 parsecs away. So, if you take a typical star in our galaxy this number isn't going to be 3; it's going to be 8,000. And this number isn't going to be 3, it's going to something like 1/1000th of an arc second. And the space telescope[aj] scatters light over tenths of arc seconds, so you have factors of 100 buried inside the light coming from that star. So, that's why you don't care about more than one digit. In fact, you probably don't even care about anything other than the exponents of this answer because why are you doing this problem? You're doing this problem to figure out whether it's plausible to think that you might be able to see a planet as a separate dot, separate from the star. And the fact that your answer comes out in arc seconds or fractions of an arc second tells you everything you need to know. You don't need anymore decimal places to realize that the idea of looking up and seeing a planet is going to fail. So, that's not the way that we're going to find planets. So, we have to come up with different scheme and that's what we're going to talk about on Tuesday. Thanks.
[end of transcript] 
ASTR 160 - Lecture 3 - Our Solar System and the Pluto Problem
Chapter 1. Review of the Problem Set [00:00:00]
Professor Charles Bailyn: Okay now, we didn't have sections this week, in case you didn't notice, and therefore you didn't have an opportunity to discuss the problem set during section. So, I thought I would say a few words about it now - here is the problem set. You probably can't read it at this typeface but that's okay. So, let's see, problem zero is just a stupid way of making you read the policies. Never mind that. Problem set one, problem one: here are exercises in one-digit scientific notation. I don't have rules for this. As I mentioned last time, the only rule is common sense. I think there might be some difficulty with the last one. This business of taking things to the one third power is important because you keep ending up with a cubed equals something, and you have to figure out what to do about that. So, let me not do this particular problem, let me do a different one for you.
Supposing you had (6 x 104)⅓. And you might be tempted to say, well okay, that's 6⅓ times 104/3. And that leads you to a bad place, because 104/3 is not the notation we want. We want this to be an integer up there. What does it mean to be a 1 with 4⁄3  of a zero after it? And so, you don't like that. So, the way to deal with this is to regroup. This is (60 x 103)⅓. That's 60⅓ x 101. What's 60⅓? Well, 4 times 4 times 4, as it happens, is 64, and that's close enough for me. So, this is 4 x 101. So, that's just an example of how these kinds of things where you take things to fractional powers, either the square root, which is to the ½, or the cube root to the ⅓.
All right, the next problem. Let's see, Neptune's moon Nereid has an orbital period of almost exactly one Earth year. If the mass of Neptune is something or other, what's its semi-major axis? So, you have P and M and you're asked for A. That's a completely straightforward plug-and-chug problem because there's an equation that relates these three things and the only tricky thing about this is that you have to make sure the units come out right.
All right, the next one looks similar in form, but it isn't. Consider a Sun-like star orbited by a planet with a period of eighty years. So, we have P--the separation of the planet and the star appears to be 20 arc seconds. So we have an angle, that's α. How far away is the star? And you want to know D. Okay, there is no equation that contains all three of those things and so this, although it looks similar in form, is actually a substantially more difficult problem.
Going on, problem four. Okay the important--in fact, there is such a star, blah, blah, does this fact make any difference in the forgoing calculation? Explain. The important thing to note about this is that I'm not asking you to do a calculation. This is not a calculation problem; this is a comment. You're supposed to say something about how the calculation would go if you were to do it, but you don't have to actually calculate anything there.
And then, finally, this last problem. This is the sort of essay question here. The point here as I've written down on the--there's about Pluto. The point here as I've written down on the actual paper itself--there's no right answer to this. This is a thought question. There are some people I know from the course evaluations who get disturbed by this because they have the feeling that science ought to have right answers; that is, after all, the point. And I keep asking these sort of touchy-feely, humanities kinds of questions. Revel in it, go with it. And what we're looking for here is the same thing as your English teacher would be looking for, right? Although perhaps less emphasis on writing style, but, just have some thoughts, do some reading, understand something and say something intelligent and defend it, okay? And a paragraph or two, you know, two sentences probably too little. If it's more than two pages double-spaced or one page single-spaced I'm going to get really irritated because I have to read these things and there are eighty of them, and so don't go nuts. Again, just be sane about it and say something intelligent. That's all we ask. Questions about the problem set or about procedural aspects of the course at this stage? If you do have some at some point, send them to us on the classes server. Yeah, go ahead.
Student: What would you say is too short for the answer to that question?
Professor Charles Bailyn: Oh the answer--well, a sentence is too short, two sentences probably too short unless they're pretty severe sentences. I mean, it's got to be a paragraph, you know; otherwise, you haven't really cleared your throat. But I don't want to say anything too precise about that. If you've got a really keen sentence, you know, that might do the job. Again, sanity ought to prevail. Yes.
Student: Is the answer to a question like that typical of most of the problem sets?
Professor Charles Bailyn: We'll probably have one of that nature. Not necessarily of this kind about scientific controversies[ak], but about something. Oh, and I should say, the way the tests will work out is it's going to be probably slightly more than half calculation and slightly less than half other things. There won't be essays because there probably isn't time to do that on a fifty-minute test but there'll be short answer questions and stuff like that. Yeah, we'll have these kinds of discussion things. They won't be the dominant part of the problem sets. Just as in this case, it's six points out of--this adds up to twenty points; this one's six [points at problem set]. Other questions? Okay, as I say, if you've got some, let us know.
Chapter 2. Conservation of Momentum[al] in Exoplanets [00:06:22]
Okay, so as I pointed out last time, we're talking about "exoplanets" ‒ planets around other stars. And the problem with exoplanets is you can't see them directly. So, you can't see the exoplanets directly as blobs of light in the sky and so what do you do? So, you have to detect them obviously indirectly and here's--we've got to invoke another one of Newton's laws. So, the key law here is now Newton's Third Law. Newton's Second Law is F = ma; you may recall that explains all the Physics 180. Newton's Third Law is usually phrased in textbooks and stuff as "every action has an equal and opposite reaction." I hate this formulation because it leads to really bad philosophy.
You know, this is one of the whole problems with physics in general. There are these words that seem to mean something. Words like "force," words like "potential," and these have technical meanings in physics that are actually different from the intuitive meaning that you have in your head just from using them in everyday life. The big problem with introductory physics is getting people to use these words as if they mean the physics definition rather than as if they mean the everyday life definition. And this leads, as I say, in extreme cases, to all sorts of bad philosophy. In fact, the two most misused physics words that I know of are, first of all, "relativity"--"Everything is relative," said Einstein. Well, no, actually, he said nothing of the kind. And the other one is "uncertainty," which has to do with quantum mechanics and these are technical terms in physics and then they get sort of promoted to use in philosophy as if they meant what they mean in English. So, I don't like this "every action has an equal and opposite reaction." You can get into all sorts of bogus philosophy and I don't want to go there.
So, I would rather phrase this as "conservation of momentum." And momentum, as I say, is a technical term. It means M, mass, times velocity, that's all it means. And the kind of use that it's put to in electoral politics or other things has nothing to do with what's going on in physics. Oh, I should say: velocity, one should be aware of, consists of two things. It's not just the speed that something has, but also its direction. And so direction counts. So, if you turn around and go at the same speed you've reversed your--you now have negative velocity compared to where you started with. This, technically speaking, makes this a vector quantity, but again, we won't go there.
Okay, so how does this work in the case of a planetary orbit? So, here's a planet, it's on one side of its star, it's going this way [draws an arrow up] and it's got some momentum. And then half an orbit later, it's over here going the other way. Let's say it's orbiting some star in the middle and it's got more or less the same speed but its direction is reversed. So over half an orbit--so over ½ orbit, the momentum is reversed. So, it goes from being positive to negative, or something like that.
Now, Newton's Third Law says that momentum is conserved. The total momentum of the system has to remain the same; so something else has to change. And here's the whole trick about finding exoplanets, and that is that the star moves too. So, when the planet's over here at this blue arrow--the star is here, and it's also moving in the opposite direction. And then half an orbit later, the planet has come over to this side. The star has moved in the opposite direction; it's now going this way. And so the star moves too, that's key.
How much does the star move? Well, the two momenta have to be equal and opposite. This is what is equal and opposite about Newton's Third Law is that these things have to cancel out. So what you find is that the mass of the planet times the velocity of the planet[am] is equal to the mass of the star times the velocity of the star[an]. And because the mass of the star is so much bigger, so huge compared to the mass of the planet, its velocity must be much, much smaller in order for these two things to be equal.
Okay. What are they orbiting around then, if everything is moving together? They orbit around the "center of mass[ao]," so-called. This is just, you know, where the balance point of a seesaw would kind of be. And so here we have--here's the center of mass, here's the star moving this way, way over here somewhere is a planet moving much faster. And let's define two quantities: this is the distance from the planet to the center of mass. Here's the distance of the star to the planet of mass. Star is moving at Vstar, planet is moving at Vplanet. And you can define a total velocity, which is equal to these two things added together. And what does that mean? That's the velocity where if you're on one of these objects, the other appears to be moving relative to you. So, if I'm going this way and you're going that way, we have a relative velocity equal to the sum of our individual velocities. And there's also a total distance, which can be defined, which is, by analogy, the sum of the distance from the planet to the center of mass, and the star to the center of mass. And that's just the distance between these two objects.
The distance and the velocity in an elliptical orbit can change during the course of the orbit. But for circular orbits[ap] or close to circular orbits they remain about the same. Orbits, you'll remember, are generally elliptical. And a way of saying this is that the maximum of the total distance between these two is this quantity a, the semi-major axis. Remember, the semi-major axis is the long slice through the ellipse. So, when this is at a maximum, that equals the semi-major axis. For orbits that are nearly circular you can sort of say in an offhand way, well this, Dtotal, doesn't change that much. So, it's the distance between the two objects.
Chapter 3. Inner and Outer Solar System Objects [00:14:02]
All right, now as I mentioned, VpMp is equal to VstarMstar. It is also true the way you figure out where the center of mass [aq]is, DpMp is equal to DstarMstar. And the whole point of this is that this is a large quantity compared to the mass of the planet, and therefore these are small quantities compared to the distances and velocities taken by the planet. Small, but as it turns out, measurable. In particular, the velocity is the thing--the velocity of the star turns out to be the thing that you can measure. And so that's how you find--determine that there's an exoplanet there. What you do is you look for the reflex motion[ar] of the star. Planets going around the star, stars going around the center of mass also. And that is a motion that now, these days, can be observed. And you can see why this might have happened only very recently, because that motion is really very small.
Let me give you some masses just to give you a sense of this. I've already written down that the Sun's mass is about 2 x 1030 kilograms. Just for reference, the Earth's mass is 6 x 1024 kg, so down by almost a factor of a million. And so the Sun moves much slower than the Earth does, due to their mutual gravity. Jupiter is the most massive of the planets, and it's at about 2 x 1027 kg, so 1,000 times smaller than the Sun. And so, of course, the Sun moves 1,000 times less because of Jupiter than it does because of the Earth.
Now, of course, the Sun actually responds to all of these planets, so it's actually executing some complicated motion, which is the sum of the motions induced by all the planets. But in fact, Jupiter is significantly more massive than the rest of the planets, so by far the dominant motion that the Sun goes through has to do with the orbit of Jupiter. And so the consequence of this, because the masses are so much smaller, is that the velocity of the star is much, much less. These two less-than signs [<<] means much, much less than the velocity of the planet. But it can nevertheless be detected.
Okay, now, what do we expect to see? Supposing you can now go out and through means that we'll actually talk about on Thursday, actually measure the velocities of stars in response to planets. What do you expect to see in those--in other stars? And basically, the answer to that is, what you expect to see depends on what your expectations for Solar Systems are. We've got one example, or at least ten years ago, we had only one example. And so, you have to take what you know about our own Solar System and infer what other Solar Systems might want to look like. And so, at this point I want to show you some things about our own Solar System, so a little slide show of the Solar System here. All right, don't take notes, I'll tell you everything you need to know after we finish the pretty pictures.
Okay, so starting from the innermost part of the Solar System. This is the innermost planet, this is the planet Mercury. Looks much like the Moon: it's basically a rock with craters on it. There was a time when we thought that its spin period was exactly the same as its orbital period, so it keeps one face to the Sun. There's all kinds of science fiction based on that--that turns out not to be true. But basically, it's kind of a hot rock, that's all you need to know about Mercury. Let's see, oh, here's a close up of a little piece of Mercury surface, and you would have a tough time telling that this was Mercury rather than the Moon or many other objects--rocky objects in the Solar System.
Next one out is Venus. Venus looks quite different because it's got a very thick atmosphere, very thick carbon dioxide atmosphere. This is all clouds that you're looking at here. And, in fact, the greenhouse effect, which is supposed to be responsible, perhaps, for global warming, was first studied and identified on Venus, because it appears to have run amok on Venus. The surface of Venus is extremely hot and it's covered with these really thick clouds. So, it was quite hard, for a long time, to get a handle on what was going on down on the surface. This has now however been accomplished. They've put things into orbit that have radar, and can view the topography through the clouds. They've also dropped things onto the surface of Venus. The problem is at 700 degrees, and it rains sulfur down there, so it's an unpleasant environment for machinery. So things don't last very long. But nevertheless, they've gotten some information. Here's a little Venus landscape. It's entirely artificially colored, right? But the topography comes from these radar mapping missions. Here is a map of the whole of Venus made by these orbiting missions. And so Venus is important primarily for its atmosphere, and as a kind of warning for what might potentially one day happen here, if we're not careful.
Okay, this is the third rock from the Sun. Ninety nine percent of all Yale courses deal with what's going on on this little piece of cosmic debris. I'm not going to say anymore about it, therefore, oh, except for one thing: it comes with this companion object. This is the Moon. The Moon is a very special thing because, relative to its planet, it's huge. This really shouldn't be thought of as a planet and a moon, but rather as a double planet. Here they are to scale, and that's much closer in size than any other moon-planet system around the major planets.
Moving outwards, we come to Mars. This is about as good an image of Mars as you can get from the Earth, and you can see why people got excited about it. These blotchy things here turn out to change with time. And in fact, they change with the Martian seasons. So people got very excited, thought, "oh my goodness, it's vegetation," you know, the seasons come, go. And there's a polar ice cap up there, obviously. And 100 years ago, people somehow convinced themselves that there were canals and maybe cities, and maybe people all over this planet. This turns out to be wrong. It isn't vegetation. It's actually dust storms--that changes what you see. And by now we have some much more close up views from things like the Viking Missions and a number of more recent missions. And this is basically what the surface of Mars looks like. It has this slight reddish tint overall, and it's a bunch of rocks. It has an atmosphere, although it's less thick than the Earth's atmosphere.
Now, one of the interesting things about Mars is you can see features that look like this. And this looks very much like river deltas. You know, you see these little tributaries coming into a big river, this kind of looks like Louisiana, or something like that. And so, people are pretty much convinced that there was once running water on Mars. And that's important, because it is thought that the existence of life as we know it is dependent on the existence of liquid water. For a long time, people thought that there was no liquid water. Now, on Mars--it turns out that the particular temperature and atmospheric pressure that exists on Mars means that water goes from the solid state, from ice and sublimes, directly into the gaseous state, much like carbon dioxide does here. That's why it's called dry ice: because carbon dioxide, when you freeze it, and then warm it up again, turns directly into gas. Water is supposed to do the same on Mars, but there was, just a month ago, this interesting picture published. This is from a satellite orbiting Mars that's been taking a lot of pictures. This is pictures of two identical parts of the Martian surface, one from 1999, one from 2005. And the claim is that there's new stuff down here, and that the way and the pattern of that new stuff, and the way it must have come on, is from stuff flowing downhill, down the side of this crater. And so now, people are thinking, maybe there is something flowing around on Mars, although clearly not all that much of it. But that would be exciting if it was confirmed.
Okay, out beyond Mars is the asteroid belt, filled with rocky chunks of stuff that look vaguely like this--many, many of them. There are asteroids all over the Solar System. Most of them are between the orbits of Mars and Jupiter, but there are other families that are elsewhere. Some of these other families, it has been suggested, come from the asteroid belt, but they've had collisions or other catastrophes, and have been bumped into different orbits. But most of the asteroids are between Mars and Jupiter.
Now, out beyond the asteroid belt are a number of other planets, and much of what we know about these other planets come from a couple of satellites that look kind of like this. These are the Voyager satellites that were launched in the 1970s and have been traveling through the Outer Solar System ever since. This is a clever thing that they did. It turned out that in the '70s and '80s, the outer planets, Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune were aligned in such a way that one satellite could catch them all as they went past. And each time it goes past one of these things, it uses the gravitational attraction of that planet to swing itself to the next one, and then to the next one, and then to the next one. And so, these wonderful satellites, for many years, gave us pictures of one planet after another, which we now know quite a lot more about than we used to.
So, here's Jupiter, this is by far the most massive planet. Here you've got the famous red spot. All that you see here is atmosphere, and it's got very elaborate weather. And the red spot, it turns out to be a hurricane that has persisted for about 350 years. To us, it seems like an almost permanent feature, although it's gotten fainter recently. But it's sort of as if--supposing you were a race of creatures whose lifetime was about half a day, and you were observing the Earth. And you observed it for many lifetimes, and you saw the same hurricane sitting down somewhere in the Caribbean. You would think that that little spot was kind of a permanent feature, and that seems to be what this is. It's a sort of really long-lasting hurricane. If you have--they have time-lapse movies of this. You can find them on the Internet, where you can see that the wind is actually circulating there.
Jupiter has moons, many of them--these--the four big ones you see here are the so-called "Galilean" moons, because they were discovered by Galileo. They've also included a little one. There are many dozens of moons this size. The moons--each of the moons has its own peculiar characteristics. I'm quite fond of this one, this is the innermost moon. It's called Io, sometimes referred to as the pepperoni pizza moon. And it's got the most elaborate volcanoes anywhere in the Solar System. It spews up sulfur all the time. And then, this sulfur sort of melts and flows all over the surface, and that's what gives it its particular color. Each of the other moons has interesting characteristics of its own. Here's an interesting thing that the Voyager satellites discovered: they discovered that Jupiter has rings. It was not thought that Jupiter had rings; from the Earth, you can't see them. But from close up, it became apparent that Jupiter has rings the same way Saturn does.
But, of course, the Saturn rings are the most spectacular. Here's Saturn, the next planet out. You can see that it, too, has weather-banded things down here. And then it has these very spectacular rings, seen here from various different angles as Saturn goes through its orbit. And these rings, we know now, are made up of individual little chunks of things. The Voyager Mission, this is obviously artificially-colored so that you could see all the different rings. And each one of those rings is made up of many, many, many little rocks. Saturn too has moons. This is Titan, Saturn's big moon. And you can see from here, in this particular picture, that Titan has an atmosphere. That makes it very interesting. People have the feeling that at places where there are atmospheres are potential sources of life, and so people find Titan an interesting moon. I actually like this one better. This is Mimas. It's just a rocky moon, but you can see it's kind of got the great grandmother of all craters up there. This thing got slammed into by some asteroid that was just barely not big enough to blow the whole thing apart, but it raised this big pucker on the side of the moon.
Moving out to the next planet, which is Uranus. In ordinary light, you can't actually see any features. Again, you're looking at the atmosphere; there are clouds. But this picture was taken in a particular kind of red light, which brings out the cloud features. And what you can see is, it's got a banded structure, the same as Jupiter and Saturn, but interestingly, the bands are on its side. One of the peculiar features of Uranus is that it rotates sideways, rather than kind of up and down, uniquely among the planets. This planet, too, has rings. It also has moons. Here's another favorite moon of mine, this is Miranda. And this looks like what happened was that it actually did get blown apart by some impact, but then fell back together again. And you can see that it looks like it's been chopped into pieces and then sort of thrown back into--together again.
Moving out to the next planet, here's Neptune. Neptune, again, has weather. Here is the big, dark spot on Neptune, similar to the big, red spot on Jupiter. This little cloud here is called Scooter, because it moves faster than the rest of the weather on Neptune. It's actually kind of a mystery how come Neptune has all this weather, because it's very cold out there. There isn't a whole lot of energy that should be in the atmosphere, and nobody can quite figure out how this is supposed to work. Neptune has moons. Here's Neptune's biggest moon, this is Triton. You can see this sort of frontier here between two types of topography, sort of moves around, and that is thought to be due to weather of various kinds--methane snow, stuff like that. And then, by now, this was the last planet Voyager II examined, and then it went past and it took this--took a lovely shot looking back at the Solar System. Here is Neptune and Triton as the Voyager Mission moved out into the Outer Solar System beyond the large planets.
Chapter 4. Kuiper Belt[as] Objects and Oort Cloud[at] [00:29:47]
Now, Pluto wasn't aligned properly to take part in this. This is--these are pictures of Pluto. This is a picture of Pluto from the ground. Here it is from the space telescope. As you can see, it's got a moon. This is kind of all we know about Pluto at the moment. There is a spacecraft that is currently on route to Pluto, and when it arrives there a couple of decades from now--a decade from now, I guess, we'll know much more.
Now, you may be aware that there was a little bit of fuss about Pluto over the summer. Let me show you why. Here it is. This is what all the fuss is about. This is three pictures, sort of shown as a movie. See this thing over here that's moving? That's moving because, unlike all the other objects in this picture, that thing is not a distant star. That is a planet in the Outer Solar System. This is the one that for a while was called Xena, now it's called Eris. And these are the discovery photographs of this. Then as they kept taking pictures, they could plot the orbit. They determined the orbit of the thing using an equation you've already discovered. They figure out how far away it is. From how far away it is and how bright it is, you can figure out how big it is. And the problem that Eris presents is, it's bigger than Pluto. And there are a whole bunch of other things out there that have also been discovered, also as big, or bigger than Pluto. Here are the eight currently largest-known, so-called "trans-Neptunian" objects, sometimes also called Kuiper Belt objects. Here's Eris, here's Pluto, here are a bunch of other ones. They find these things, like, one or two of them a year, now, and so we can confidently expect that twenty years from now, there are going to 100 such things. So you have the problem--oh you should--it's worth nothing, these things also have moons, and some of them have a moon-to-planet ratio similar to the Earth and the moon. But here's the Earth for scale. All of them, including Pluto and Eris, very much smaller than the Earth.
And so you've got yourself a problem. If you're going to count Pluto, how do you not count these other things? And so the first suggestion was, well, you ought to count Pluto, and you ought to count a bunch of these other things too. And so, there was going to be twelve planets, or something like that, and presumably, many more to come. And then people decided, you know, the heck with this whole bunch of things. We'll give them a different name; we won't call them planets at all. And that was what was finally determined, leading to all sorts of, you know, "Save Pluto" campaigns from disgruntled third-graders who--[laughter] yes, thank you very much--who were unhappy about having to re-memorize all the mnemonics that tell you the planets in the Solar System. Actually, if you included things like Quaoar, you'll get yourself into trouble trying to learn them all. And they're finding lots of lots of these things.
Okay, so just a little about the geography of the Solar System. Here's the Inner Solar System out to the orbit of Jupiter, with the asteroids and stuff. Here's the Outer Solar System, starting with Jupiter. Here's Pluto, and you'll notice that Pluto really is an elliptical orbit, much more elliptical than the other planets. It also turns out the orbit is tipped. All the other planets--the orbits are in the same plane as each other. Pluto's orbit is tipped out of the plane. Here's one of the--these other trans-Neptunian objects. Here's its orbit, and you can see that it goes way, way out and is highly elliptical, very much out of the plane. This is, in general, true of these, what are now called "dwarf planets," or "trans-Neptunian objects," or "Kuiper Belt objects." But it's also true that there is a further component of the Solar System even beyond that. Here's Sedna's orbit--that again is Sedna's orbit, so we've now gone up a degree in scale. And then there's this whole cloud of stuff out there called the Oort cloud and this is--this is where the comets live.
Comets are sort of ice balls. We can't see them individually in the Oort cloud, but sometimes they collide with each other, and one of them falls into the Inner Solar System. And as it does, it heats up. It's made out of ice, the ice melts, gets--streams backward, and we get these very spectacular things. Comets cause all kinds of mayhem, they kill dinosaurs, for example, and recently we've seen an example of this. This is a comet called Shoemaker-Levy that's broken up into a bunch of pieces. And in 1994, those pieces slammed into Jupiter, and here you see the various--the effect of the various pieces of this comet that hit Jupiter. And so, comets can be dangerous things when they land on your planet.
Okay, this is the Outer Solar System again. Here's the tipped orbit of Pluto. That's the orbit of Neptune. Here's Voyager I, Voyager II traveling now outward. They are escaping from the Solar System. And the very edges of the Sun's influence, where you might say the Solar System ends and the interstellar medium begins, are indicated here. Each of these things means a slightly different boundary to the Sun's influence. But the Voyagers are going to get there sometime in our lifetime, so they will be the first man-made things that actually pass out of our Solar System. And that's as far as this goes. Let me turn the lights back on, here.
Chapter 5. Classification and Interpretation of Celestial Objects[au] [00:35:13]
Okay, so much for the Solar System. Now. Here's the important question: I just threw a whole bunch of facts at you. Facts, information, pretty pictures. We have a lot of facts, and information, and pretty pictures. The Voyagers took many thousands of pictures and other--acquired other forms of information, as well. There have been many other spacecraft flying around our Solar System for quite some time. We know a lot of things. Here's the question: now that you know all this stuff, what do you do with that information? So, what do you do with all this Solar System information? One thing you could do is, write it all down and memorize it. I strongly advise against that. You know, this is what the Internet is for. There are a whole bunch of websites out there that'll tell you everything you could possibly want to know about all of the objects and all of the planets, moons, everything else. So that isn't actually a productive way, I don't think, of spending your time. So, what would you rather do? What would one--what would be a more productive way of thinking about this material?
And now, I want to step back and remind you of how science works. Remember the scientific method[av]? They probably taught you something about this when you were, like, eleven or twelve years old. And you'll remember how this works. So, scientific method--so, you have a hypothesis, which is a fancy word for a guess. Maybe you have competing hypotheses. And on the basis of this hypothesis you formulate some kind of experiment. Good experiments are sometimes called "controlled" experiments. And on the basis of the results of the experiment, you determine how much you believe the hypothesis, or which hypothesis you believe. And then, you know, you may modify your hypothesis or change it all together, and then do more experiments. And by iterating this procedure, you develop an understanding of whatever it is you're trying to think about. Okay.
No. Not really, certainly not in astronomy. Astronomy doesn't work this way at all. Think about what an experiment would be in astronomy. Okay, so here's a ball of gas the size of the Sun made out of pure hydrogen. Here's another ball of gas the size of the Sun made out of pure helium. We stick them in the sky and watch them evolve for ten billion years, okay. No, you can't do experiments in astronomy. It doesn't work that way at all. So, there has to be some other way of approaching it. And the reason for this is, is that astronomy is not an experimental science, it's an observational science. This is true of many other sciences. A lot of biology, particularly environmental, or ecological aspects of biology, work this way. All of the social sciences. You can't do controlled experiments in child development, that's just ugly. And so, these are observational sciences[aw], and this has a different methodology. And it starts, as its name would suggest, with observations. And you go out and you find a bunch of things, whether they're butterflies, or planets, or whatever they are. And what do you do when you've found a whole bunch of things? What's the next step?
The next step is classification. You put them into categories. And it's important to get this right. If you're dealing with, for example, animals, and you classify them as things that live in the ocean and things that live on land, then you're going to have fish and whales in the same category. And you're going to have lizards and frogs and snakes in the same category with people and bears, and things like that. And this isn't going to lead you to a deep understanding, because you haven't got the categories right. And so the classification is very important. And what it leads to when you get it right is a useful interpretation of what is going on. This is--interpretation, it's just a fancy word for a good story. These are the kinds of things we write down in textbooks. The astronomers sometimes dignify this with the fancy word "scenario." But it's basically a story. And on the basis of this story, you say, well, we better check out, let's see whether this story holds up. Let's do more observations, and--all of these connections work in all directions. And so, this is actually a better description of how an observational science is done than this kind of thing up here.
So now, having gone through that little piece of philosophy, let's apply it in practice. I've just described to you some observations, some observations of the Solar System. Now, what I'm going to do is, I'm going to take those objects that I just showed you and classify them, or attempt to. So let us classify--these are now going to be categories of Solar System objects. So, I claim, or at least, it's the start of a good story, that there are six categories of objects in the Solar System.
The first is the Sun, which I didn't actually show you, which is 99% of all of the mass in the Solar System, and almost all of the energy and heat, and so forth.
Then there are the inner planets, sometimes called the terrestrial planets, because the Earth is the prime example. And these are rocks, basically that would be silicon, iron, elements like that, with a very thin surface coating of ice, in some cases melted, in some cases gaseous. What I mean by ice is not necessarily water-ice, but also things like ammonia, and methane, and other compounds of that kind. This coating is very thin. If you had a scale model of the Earth that was six feet across and you put your hand up against it, you wouldn't even feel that it was wet from the oceans. So, not very much. And these have masses, these things, these inner planets of, I don't know, 10-7 to 10-5 of the Sun. And they're in basically circular orbits.
Then you've got the asteroids, which are irregular, very small rocks in--mostly in orbits between Mars and Jupiter. And out beyond the asteroids, you've got the outer planets, sometimes called the "Jovian" planets, because Jupiter is the prime example of these things. And these are quite different from the inner planets. They've got a lot of gas and ice, both gas, which I'm defining here to be hydrogen and helium, and ice, which I'm defining to be, as I said, water, ammonia, methane, and similar compounds. And these are more massive, 10-4 to 10-3 of the Sun. They have rings, many moons, also circular orbits. And all these orbits, both these planets and these planets are basically in one plane.
Out beyond the Jovian planets[ax] are these trans-Neptunian objects, or Kuiper Belt objects. This is Pluto, etcetera. We don't really know what they are yet, but it seems like they're probably going to be rocky, just to judge from their size and mass. So we think they're rocky. They're a low mass, less than 10-7 of the mass of the Sun. And they are in elliptical and inclined orbits, way out there.
And then, finally, in the outer region, in this so-called Oort cloud, you have the comets, which are little snowballs. Balls of ice, again, ice in this generic sense.
So, here are the six categories that I would claim exist in the Solar System. And here's my problem with the whole Pluto debate[ay]. The Pluto debate was basically about whether these guys are going to count as planets. But the thing is, "planets" is already a bad description, because it contains two quite different categories; namely, these inner terrestrial planets, and the outer Jovian planets. So, it seems to me that arguing whether category five should be part of some category that already contains two fundamentally different kinds of objects is kind of a strange argument to be having. Either we should split these two things off from each other, or, if we're going to join these two kinds of the categories, fine, bring in anything you like. I don't care, add the asteroids, too. And, in fact, in the original proposal, one of the asteroids qualified as well. And so, it doesn't seem to me that this controversy was really paying justice to an appropriate classification of the things in the Solar System.
Okay, so now. Having classified it, the next step is interpretation. And, I think I will leave that--let's see, how are we doing for time? Yes, I'll leave that one for next time. So the question is going to be: now that you have these six kinds of objects, what is the story you tell about how the Solar System evolved? And what, in turn, does that tell you about what other kinds of planets you should see around other stars?
[end of transcript]
ASTR 160 - Lecture 4 - Discovering Exoplanets: Hot Jupiters
Chapter 1. Theory of Planetary Formation[az] [00:00:00]
Professor Charles Bailyn: We were talking last time about the objects in the Solar System. And we'd gone through kind of two of the three stages of the scientific method as it's applied to observational science rather than experimental science. And the first thing was just making observations, finding a bunch of things. And so I gave you a little slide show depicting some of the objects in our Solar System. And after observations the next thing to do is classification, and we did some of that too, and I divided all these objects that had been discovered into six categories. And then, once you've done that, once you have some categories that kind of make sense, then the next thing is to interpret these results and to try and explain where these categories come from, how they arise, and actually figure something out. And I've described that as interpretation, and I want to offer you a little bit of interpretation about what we've found about the Solar System.
Now, I only want to explain some of the classifications. This is actually a common thing to do. When you find a whole bunch of different things and you've got twelve classes and three sub-classes and two exceptions, you kind of want to explain the big features first and then worry about the little things later. This is commonly done.
So, what I'm going to do is I'm going to talk about only the inner terrestrial planets. You'll recall that these are small, rocky things in relatively short orbit, and contrast them with the outer planets, the Jovian, the Jupiter-like planets, which are large and have not only rocks, but also lots of ice and gas. And these things are in wider orbit, but the orbits of both of these are, basically, more or less circular. Not precisely circular, they're actually elliptical, but quite close, and they're all in the same plane. That is to say, they're all going around the same way. There's nothing that's going this way instead of this way. So, they're circular and co-planar. And let's try for an explanation of those particular features.
Okay, so this would be something like a Theory of Planetary Formation: how the planets formed, why they get that way. This word, "theory," is a serious problem. This is one of the foremost examples of a word that means something different when scientists use it than when normal people use it. In scientific parlance, a theory is something which has a lot of support, which explains a lot of observed or experimental fact. In everyday life, of course, a theory means a wild guess. So, there's a pretty stark difference between those two definitions. This gets our friends the evolutionary biologists, in all kinds of trouble because they keep talking about the theory of evolution. And a certain segment of society interprets that as the wild guess of evolution and this creates various kinds of difficulties. The problem is, there isn't another word that one can readily use for what the science definition of this--you could use "paradigm," you could use "scenario." These are kind of ugly sorts of words, so I think we're stuck with "theory." But I mean this in the sense of something that explains a lot of facts, rather than in the sense of wild guess.
Okay, so here we go: Theory of Planetary Formation. So, the idea is that the planets form from a disk of material around the Sun. So, the Sun and the planets are created out of a collapsing cloud. The cloud collapses, some parts of the cloud are rotating, that prevents them from collapsing. And so, you have a situation, after a while, where you have a sort of star-like thing in the middle, and then a kind of disk of stuff around it. So, this is a side view, and in the top view, all these things are in orbit here. And this disk consists of basically the same material as the Sun, which is to say, lots of gas, by which, I mean hydrogen and helium in particular. Some ice, of course, when it's in a star it's all melted. But these are elements like carbon, nitrogen, oxygen, that go into making ices, and a little bit of heavier elements that could, if you put them all together, form dust and rocks, and things like that. A little heavier element: things like silicon and iron. So, that's what the Sun consists of, and so does this disk orbiting around it.
Then what happens? In the disk, things gradually stick together. So rather than having individual atoms or molecules, the molecules and atoms sort of run into each other, form dust grains[ba], the dust grains run--or ice crystals or whatever, those run into each other, form bigger things. And you gradually make bigger things as the little things collide with each other and stick. So in the disk, things gradually stick together and become tiny little objects, which are sometimes given the name "planetesimals[bb]." And then the "planetesimals" bump into each other and stick. These stick together until you've got a situation where in each region, each orbit, each distance from the Sun[bc], you've coalesced everything into one large object. And so you end up with one big object in each region, by which I mean distance from the Sun, distance from the star.
And this explains the orbits, because since these large objects have been created by running a lot of small objects together, the ellipticity of any of the elliptical part of the orbit of any of these things tend to cancel out. Because one of these objects will be elliptical in one direction; another will be elliptical in another direction. If you put them all together they'll--that orbit will tend to be circular. Similarly, some of the objects will be going up out of the plane of the Solar System, some will be going down, but you'll run them together and they'll all end up with kind of similar circular co-planar orbits. So makes approximately--that's the approximate sign [~]--circular, co-planar orbit. So, that's good because that's one of the things we're trying to explain.
And there is an expected difference between how this works out in the inner parts of the Solar System and how it works out in the outer parts of the Solar System. In the Inner Solar System the ice and gas in the "planetesimals" evaporates and does not become part of the planet that gets formed. And so the planets are only the rocky parts. They actually hold onto a little bit of the ice and gas, but not very much. Whereas, in the Outer Solar System, the ice is frozen, and so it behaves just like rocks. And so planets have rocks and ice. This means that they're substantially more massive. And if they're sufficiently massive, then they have enough gravity to hold onto the gas also--onto gas as well. It's also true that in the Outer Solar System there's more volume, there's more stuff, and so there's more stuff to build the planets out of in the first place.
And so, this nicely explains the difference between the Inner Solar System and the Outer Solar System. You build these things up out of little chunks. But in the Inner Solar System the temperature is high enough that the chunks of ice evaporate, and so you can't build them up out of that. And so you get much, much smaller things made almost entirely out of rocks, in contrast to the Outer Solar System where you have enough ice, you build much bigger planets, and in some cases you hang on to a lot of the gas as well.
So, this is interesting because it makes a prediction about how other Solar Systems ought to look. Namely, that this difference between inner planets and outer planets ought to exist everywhere. That planetary systems--there should be a general feature, because there's nothing of what I've said so far that's unique to the Sun. So planetary systems should have inner rocky planets and outer Jupiter-like planets, sort of gas-plus-ice sorts of planets, much bigger. And the dividing line between these two kinds of planets is determined by temperature. Because there will be some temperature where those ice things melt and therefore you don't expect it to be at the same distance away from a star. You expect it to be at the place where the temperature is the same. Therefore, if you have a very bright star, hot star, you'll have inner planets out further from that star, inner-type terrestrial planets will go out further. And if you have a very dim faint star, which doesn't generate as much heat, the gas planets[bd] will--the dividing line between the gas planets and the terrestrial planets will be much closer in. So the dividing line is determined by temperature, hence, by the luminosity--the amount of energy given off of the star.
So now, this tells us what we're supposed to do next. Namely, go out and find a whole bunch of other Solar Systems and verify this prediction. Namely, that if you've got a really bright, hot star, you ought to have rocks out fairly far in the Solar System, whereas, if you have a dim star, you'll have Jupiter-like things coming in much closer. And so that's what I want to talk about now, is how people went about doing this and what the results were. And I'll tell you the punch line in advance, which is that this totally doesn't work. But it's an obvious prediction from our theory of planet formation that came about by an examination of what was going on in our own Solar System.
Chapter 2. Observing Moving Exoplanets and Stars [00:12:04]
Okay. So, observing exoplanets. How do you find these things? And you'll recall we started down this track in the last lecture. The key point here is that stars move too. It's not just the planet going around a star, it's the planet and the star both go around the center of mass of the system and the stars move, too. You can't see the planets independently. And there was a little equation--the velocity of the star times the mass of the star is equal to the velocity of the planet times the mass of the planet. This is basically an equation of momentum. The distance of the star to the center of mass, times its mass, is equal to the distance of the planet to the center of mass, times the mass of the planet. This is kind of a definition of the center of mass. And sometimes, you don't want to deal with the individual velocities or distances, you want to deal with the total velocity or distances. And so that's just defined where if you want to talk about the total that's obviously justDstar plus Dplanet. Similarly, for the total velocity and the total mass, and that's just defining terms. And then, in order to relate these distances to things that have shown up in our equations and Kepler's Third Law, it's true that the maximum value of the total distance--that is to say, the distance between these things can vary, because they can be in elliptical orbits. Sometimes they're closer than others. And if you take the maximum distance between them--that's the maximum of Dtotal--that's a, that's the semi-major axis of the orbit.
And now, for nearly circular orbits, as the planets turn out to be, then Dtotal is always the same, because if it's circular the distance between them doesn't vary. So then, Dtotal is more or less equal to the semi-major axis because it's always the same, therefore it's always near its own maximum.
And then, you can also say something interesting about the velocity. The velocity--what's the definition of velocity? Velocity is miles per hour, or something like that. So, it's distance per time. And let's take a time period of one orbital period and ask the question, how far does something go in one orbital period? Well, it goes all the way around its orbit. And you may recall from high school geometry that if you know the radius of a circle, you also know its circumference. The circumference is the distance it would have to travel, that's 2π times the radius. This is the basic fact from geometry and so that's 2π times the distance, in this case, the semi-major axis. But this is only true for nearly circular orbits and the reason is that in highly elliptical orbits, the velocity changes by a substantial amount. It moves much faster when it's closer. And so you can only really define what the overall velocity of the thing is, if you've got a nearly circular orbit. But in that case, as is true for planets, this 2πa over P gives you a value for velocity.
Now, so we have another little equation here, V equals 2πa / P. This is an important one, so you'll want to remember that. And I should say, which kind of Vs and as, remember up here there is Vstar, Vplanet, Vtotal, all these different kinds of things. What do I actually mean by that? And it can mean any of them, but it has to be consistent. So if you're dealing with the velocity of the star then a is equal to Dstar. Remember these are all nearly circular orbits so D isn't going to change. And if you've--if you're dealing with V of the planet, then a is equal to D of the planet, and that is approximately equal toDtotal. Because the mass of the planet is so low that almost all the motion in the system comes from the planet. So, you can also deal with Vtotal , which is equal to Vplanet. And so, all these things go together. But if you're worried about the velocity of the star, you have to be careful, because it's not a of the orbit as a whole, it's just a tiny piece of the orbit that involves the motion of the star.
Okay? Let's do an example. How fast does the Earth move? V = (2πa) / P. Well, we know a is equal to one Astronomical Unit. P is equal to one year for the Earth's orbit, and so the velocity of the Earth is 2π Astronomical Units per year. Pretty straightforward but not very informative, because we don't have a feeling for measuring velocities in Astronomical Units per year. There's a joke in--a kind of physics joke that you convert all velocities into furlongs per fortnight just to be annoying. But let's not do that; let's convert it instead into meters per second, because then we have the hope of understanding what's going on. V is equal to 2π. One Astronomical Unit is 1.5 times 10 to the 11 meters. And a year is 3 x 107 seconds.
π / 3 = 1.
2 x 1.5 = 3.
1011 / 107.
11 - 7 = 4. So, this is 104 meters per second, that's 30 kilometers per second. So, we move right along as we go around the Sun.
If you did this for Jupiter, plugged in the various values for Jupiter--I won't actually do that calculation, you can do it on your own--you discover that Jupiter moves about half as fast as the Earth. So, it goes around 15 kilometers per second, that's 1.5 x 104 meters per second. So now, we can ask the question, "How fast does the Sun move in response to the orbit of these planets?" So how fast is the solar motion induced by Jupiter? Okay, and now we go back to this momentum equation. Velocity of Jupiter times the mass of Jupiter is equal to the velocity of the Sun times the mass of the Sun. What we want to know is the velocity of the Sun. And so that is equal to the velocity of Jupiter, which we just calculated, times the mass of Jupiter, divided by the mass of the Sun. 1.5 x 104, that's the velocity of Jupiter. Mass of Jupiter, as it happens--I think I wrote this down last time, 2 x 1027 kilograms. Mass of the Sun, 2 x 1030. Twos cancel, obviously. We get 1.5 x 104. Times 1027, that's 1031. 1031 / 1030=101. Is equal to 15 meters per second, not kilometers now, meters.
And so the Sun--Jupiter moves 15 kilometers per second, the Sun moves 15 meters per second. That makes perfect sense, because the Sun is 1,000 times more massive than Jupiter, so it has to be going 1,000 times more slowly. So instead of moving at some number of kilometers per second, it's moving at some number of meters per second. This, it turns out, can be detected with modern equipment. "Detectable," let's say, in distant stars. You can see things that move by 15 meters a second. We'll come back to how that's done in a minute.
How about the Earth? Solar motion due to Earth. Now, you might think is going to be bigger, because the velocity of Earth is bigger than the velocity of Jupiter. But, of course, the mass is much, much smaller. So we have MearthVearth is equal to Msun Vsun, where Vsun now means the motion induced by Earth. This number is bigger than it was for Jupiter, but this number's a whole lot smaller. And so the overall effect is that the Vsun is going to be smaller, VearthMearth / Msun. That's 3 x 104, that's the velocity. Mass of the Earth, as it turns out, is 6 x 1024 meters per second. The Sun, down here at 2 x 1030, same Sun. 6 / 2 = 3. 3 times 3 is 10, so we get (101 x 104 x 1024) / 1030. One--five--29 over 30. That's 10-1 = 1 / 10 of a meter per second, or 10 centimeters per second.
So that's much, much slower than the Sun moves in response to Jupiter. Why? Because the Earth is so much less massive. So, 15 meters a second for--as the result of Jupiter, only 10 centimeters a second, a tenth of a meter per second, as a result of Earth. And with current technology, things that slow are not detectable, yet in other--around--in other stars. So, we have a situation, and this is what was happening about ten years ago, where instruments had been developed that could, in principle, see the reflex motion of stars due to planets like Jupiter, but weren't yet capable of seeing the motion of stars due to planets like Earth. But, we expect that Solar Systems ought to have planets like Jupiter, and so people went out to try and look.
Chapter 3. Doppler Shift[be] [00:23:45]
All right, how do you find--How do you observe these things? And now, if you've taken high school physics, you will recall, perhaps, something called the Doppler Shift. This is the key. And this is a way of measuring velocity and it turns out oddly enough that velocities are some of the most easy and straightforward things to measure in astronomical objects[bf] because you can determine them by the Doppler Shift. And so just to remind you or to inform you, if you haven't seen this before, and there is some help sheets and things that you can look at about this too. Light is characterized by its wavelength, which is usually given the Greek letter Lambda [λ]. And light that is something like 4 x 10-7 meters. A wavelength has units of length. This looks blue to us. Light that is--let's color code this for your convenience, 5 x 10-7meters looks green, 7 x 10-7 meters kind of looks red. Longer wavelengths are what we call "infrared." And shorter wavelengths that we can't see are called "ultraviolet." And so, ultraviolet up here. And if you get really, really long--if you have, like, meter wavelengths--that's radio waves, out here. And if you have really short wavelengths, those are x-rays and gamma rays. So, all of these kinds of radiation are basically the same thing, called "electro-magnetic radiation"; again, there's a help sheet. These are all electro-magnetic radiation, and what kind of radiation it is depends on the wavelength.
And the key to the Doppler Shift is that the observed wavelength changes, depending on the relative motion of the thing emitting the light in the observer. Motion of source and observer. In particular, if they're moving toward each other, then the wavelength gets shorter, and if they're moving away from each other, the wavelength gets longer.
Do you feel an equation coming on? Because obviously this is going to need to be quantified, right? How much shorter? How much longer? But before we do that, let me just point out that this motion towards is sometimes called a "blueshift" because it makes--it pushes the light from the red end of the visual spectrum towards the blue and this kind of thing here, the motion away from each other is called the "redshift[bg]."
And let me show you why this is true before I write down the equation. Let's see, it's just--let me get out of that and try this one instead. It's just a property of how waves look, so look what happens. If the thing is stationary there, in the middle, that's emitting the waves, then the waves propagate equally in all directions, and both observers see the same distance between successive waves. That is to say, the same wavelength. And you can see that there. Then, when the thing is moving in some direction, each successive wave is emitted a little bit closer to one observer, and a little further away from the other observer. And so, because the waves are emitted at different places, the wave fronts here--I'll wait until this cycle goes through again. The wave fronts for this observer are closer to each other and the wavelengths looks shorter. So, when the thing is coming towards you that's emitting the wave, it looks shorter to the observer it's going towards. Whereas, for this guy, the waves--each successive wave is emitted a little bit further away. And so the wave fronts are further away from each other when they pass, and then the wavelength becomes longer.
So, that's the kind of conceptual thing that's going on. And the key thing is that the velocity that's relevant here is velocity toward and away from you. If the thing is going sideways, it doesn't make any difference. And so, it's not actually velocity that you observe by looking at the Doppler Shift. It's radial velocity[bh], which is the technical term for--is the thing coming towards you or moving away from you. And how fast is it coming towards you and how fast is it moving away from you? Okay, let me turn this off here.
So here's the equation for that--let's see here. Lambda is the wavelength--I'll explain all these terms in a minute. And this is important. And the terms mean the following things: this is radial velocity [Vr], and it's positive when it's going away from you. It's negative when it's going towards you. And it's zero when it's going sideways. And it's a velocity, it's in meters per second or whatever the appropriate units of--furlongs per fortnight, or whatever the appropriate units are. The only restriction on the units is, it has to be in the same units as the thing in the denominator, here. That's C, that's the speed of light. That's 3 x 108 meters per second. Maybe we should have you work it out in furlongs per fortnight. No, no, no, we won't do that. But as long as the velocity here is expressed in the same terms as you express the speed of light, then the units will work out. This λ with the little zero at the bottom is the rest wavelength, so that's the wavelength you would observe from whatever light source, electro-magnetic radiation source you have, if nothing was moving. And Delta Lambda [Δλ], this is not Δ times λ. That's one symbol, confusingly enough. Delta always means change; you may remember this from calculus if you've taken calculus. Delta always means change, so this is a change in velocity--sorry, change in the wavelength. And it is defined such that the observed wavelength is equal to the rest wavelength, plus the change in the wavelength induced by the radial velocity.
So now, look how this works. If this side of the equation is negative--if it's coming towards you--then this quantity is negative. That means this quantity is negative. That means this quantity is negative. That means the observed wavelength is shorter than the rest wavelength, which is exactly how it's supposed to be. When we come towards you, it's blueshifted, the wavelengths get shorter. Similarly, if this is going--if something's going away from you then Vr is positive, this is positive, and you end up with a longer wavelength. Okay?
All right, example: how fast do you have to go to turn a red light green? This is potentially useful should you ever be pulled over for running a red light. You can just say, "it looked green." How fast to make a red light green? And let's call green light 5 x 10-7 meters. Red light is 7 x 10-7 meters. So Δλ had better be equal to (7 - 5) x 10-7. That's 2 x10-7 again in meters. And we want this to be negative, because we want λ0 to be the red. That's what it would be like if nothing was moving and we want λobserved to be green. And λobserved = λ0 + Δλ. And this had better be, - 2 x 10-7 meters. And so Δλ / λ 0, that's (- 2 x 10-7) over (5 x 10-7).So that's - 2⁄5 is equal to the radial velocity over the speed of light. So, if you're going at - 2⁄5 the speed of light, then the red light looks green. Now, the minus just means you have to be moving toward that light.
Now, two things about this, first of all, don't use this as an excuse, because it'll cost you much more in the ticket for going over the speed limit if you're going at 2⁄5 of the speed of light. Second of all, be wary of this a little bit because there is, in fact, a change to the equation that happens when you're going close to the speed of light, and we'll talk about that when we get to relativity. And so this is just an example of how this works out. But when you're dealing with the motions of stars ‒ 15 meters per second, 10 centimeters a second--you're nowhere near the speed of light, and so the equation that I wrote down is actually fine.
So, what do you expect to see when you're looking at a star, which has a planet in orbit around it? Looking at a star in some kind of orbit--so here's the radial velocity as a function of time. And the key thing about orbits is that the radial velocity changes, because first the thing's coming towards you then later in its orbit it turns around goes the other way. Then it comes back and it comes towards you, turns around and goes the other way. So, the radial velocity will change from positive to negative and back as the object first comes towards you, then away from you. And so, it'll look like this if you make a whole bunch of observations of this.
It turns out that for circular orbits, this is a sine wave. And if you were to observe this, you could observe directly from such a plot, if you made repeated observations of the radial velocity of a star, or some other thing in orbit, you could observe two things. First of all, you would immediately be able to tell what the orbital period is. That's the amount of time--this is a time axis--it takes for the object to come back to the same place in the orbit for a second time.
Second of all, you could tell something about what the velocity is. The amplitude of this sine wave is something to do with the overall velocity, because that's the maximum velocity it has coming towards you. But you have to be a little careful here, because that's only true if the object--if the orbit is edge-on. Let me explain what I mean by that, we'll come back to this later. If the orbit's going this way, then it never comes towards you or goes away from you--it's always going sideways. If, on the other hand, the orbit's going this way, then first it comes towards you, then it goes away from you. And if it's somewhere in between, you only see part of the motion of the orbit in terms of radial velocity. So, this amplitude is V if the orbit is edge-on. If not, V is going to be more than that, because you're only seeing part of the motion. That's a detail we'll come back to later. So, this is what you expect to see if there's a planet going around the star, and if you have enough sensitivity in your measurements of the Doppler Shift to be able to actually see that motion.
Chapter 4. 51 Pegasus and "Hot Jupiters" [00:37:47]
Okay, so here's what they saw. This is a star called 51 Pegasus, in the Constellation of Pegasus. It is a "solar analog," so-called, by which they mean, it's about as much like the Sun as they can--as you can find if you go out and look at other stars. So it's very, very much like the Sun. This is a radial velocity curve[bi]. I have taken the axis off for a reason I'll point out later. This is radial velocity versus time, and this is exactly what you expect to see. It goes up; it comes down--very good news. This is exactly what you expect to see for a planet.
There are two problems here, as it turns out. Problem number one is the X-axis, because it turns out, the amount of time it takes you to go one orbit around for this object is a little more than four days. The shortest orbital period of a planet in our own Solar System is that of Mercury, which is eighty-eight days, so this thing is way closer to the star than anything in our solar system. X-axis problem is that P is equal to around four days.
Problem number two is the Y-axis. And now let me put some units on to this thing. I've done a very bad thing of showing you a graph with no units, but it was just to prolong the suspense here. VR. Zero. So, that's going sideways. This is 50 meters a second. This is negative 50 meters a second. And so first it--here it's coming towards you, there it's going away from you. And so, the amplitude of this thing, and therefore the velocity of the star, is something like 50 meters a second. Now, it's less obvious why that's a problem, but it is. And let me show you why. Let me do the equation--do the equations a little bit.
Okay, so this is a solar analog. What is the semi-major axis of the planets orbit? Axis of planet. We know P is equal to--let's see 4 / 365.24 is equal to 1 / 100 is equal to 10-2 in years. That's four days over a year. And M is equal to 1 solar mass because it's a solar analog. So, a3 = P2.
M = (10-2)2
M is equal--one. 10-4--
So a is equal to 10 to the--well let's--we got to do this right. (100 x 10-6)⅓.
53 = 125. So the cube root of 100 is 5.
5 x 10-2 Astronomical Units. Or let's put it in real units here. 5 x 10-2. An Astronomical Unit is 1.5 x 1011 meters.
5 x 1.5 is like 7 x 109 meters. So that's how--that's the semi-major axis--and if you compare it, if you go look at the lists of planets in our own Solar System, what you'll discover is that's way closer than any of the planets in our own Solar System--way closer to the star than Mercury is.
I haven't used the Y-axis yet. Now I'm about to, because what I'm going to do is, I'm going to take--I'm going to figure out the velocity that this planet is moving at. That's 2 π a / P. You wrote that down a little while ago; a, I just figured out. So, 2 times π times 7 times 109. P is 1/100 of a year. So, that's 10-2, times 3 x 107, which is the number of seconds in a year. π / 3 = 1.
2 x 7 = 15.
10 9 ‒
10-2 x 107.
105 --
So, this is 15 x 104, or 1.5 x 105. So this is thing is going--the planet now, this is Vtotal, which is approximately equal toVplanet, is going at 150 kilometers a second. Much faster than the Earth is going around; well, that makes perfect sense. It's in closer--got to move faster to stay in its orbit. And so, this is 150 kilometers a second if you prefer those units. Now, we know the velocity of the planet, we know the mass of the star, we know the velocity of the star and so we can figure out the mass of the planet.
Here's how it works. MpVp = MstarVstar.
Vplanet, we've just figured out, is 1.5 x 105. Actually, let's leave it as 15 x 104, that'll turn out to be easier for the arithmetic. The mass of the stars, the same as the mass of the Sun, 2 x 1030. The velocity of the star we just observed. We saw it moving back and forth, it's 50 kilometers a second, 5 x 101. Okay, so now--and this is multiplied by the mass of the planet.
So, the mass of the planet is equal to 2 x 1030, times (5 x 101) / (15 x 104).
5 / 15 is a third, so this is a third times 10-3, times the mass of the Sun. 10-3 times the mass of the Sun, that's the mass of Jupiter. So, this is equal to ⅓ of the mass of Jupiter--which is, by the way, bigger than the mass of Saturn or any other object in our own Solar System.
Okay, so that's catastrophic, right? That's a hopeless disaster, because the first part of the lecture and the second part of the lecture have entirely contradicted each other. Because in the first part of the lecture I gave you a whole song and dance, and you all wrote it down, and it sounded believable at the time. How inner planets were going to be these small rocky things. And now the very first planet we go out and find turns out to be a very close planet that's quite massive. And this is impossible according to this nice little theory of planetary formation that I promulgated to you earlier in the lecture. And so, the very first planet that was observed turned out to be a screw-up. Worse than that, there were soon dozens more like it discovered.
These are given the name "Hot Jupiters[bj]," and you can see what the problem is. If you figure out what the surface temperature of these things ought to be, it's over 1,000 degrees. There's no way you could have gas or ice on such a thing, it would totally melt. And there aren't enough rocks in the whole rocky elements--silicon and iron, and so forth--in the whole of the planetary system of our own Solar System to add up to ⅓ of a Jupiter, even if you put them all together.
So how is this done? What is going on here? It seems clear that one of the two things must be true. Either this thing isn't a planet and there's some other explanation for this attractive bunch of data here, or something has gone seriously wrong in our understanding of how planets form. And stay tuned, we'll talk about that next time.
[end of transcript]


ASTR 160 - Lecture 5 - Planetary Transits
Chapter 1. A Case for Pluto? Interactions between Culture and Science [00:00:00]
Professor Charles Bailyn: I have spent a very enjoyable weekend reading your Pluto comments. No, that was fun. It is a surprisingly--it's a surprisingly deep topic. There are technical issues about how orbits of planets work. There are these interesting cultural and political currents that underlie the whole thing. And also some sort of deep philosophy, or what the literary professors like to call "theory," about what it means--what it means to name something, and what the consequences of particular names are. And so I thought I would make a couple comments on the Pluto thing first, before we get back to the Hot Jupiters.
Let's see. The first thing I would say--let me encourage you all, when you get this kind of a question--answer the question that's asked. The biggest problem in the answers that I saw was that sometimes you just didn't address the specific question that was asked. What I asked was, "To what extent is the Pluto controversy a scientific controversy?" You don't answer that by a narrative describing what happens. If you say, "Well, they discovered Eris, and then that threw the scientific world into confusion, and then they had this big meeting and there was all this fuss, and then people started to get involved who weren't scientists," and so forth--that doesn't answer the question. Because the question was, "To what extent is this a scientific controversy?"
There are two possible categories of answer to that question. One is, "Yes, it is primarily a scientific controversy." And the other category is, "No. It was primarily not a scientific controversy." And if you didn't say one of those things, or something somewhere in between, then that's not kind of responsive to the question. I would say that you could answer that particular question in this case, in both directions, perfectly well. If you want to make a case that it's a scientific issue, you say, "Look, classification is very important to science." I made that point in class on--a week ago, and that, you know--you've got to have your classifications right in order to understand what's going on. And what has happened? Here is--new data has come in, which has thrown the old classifications into question. Although, it should be noted that there wasn't officially a definition of "planet" that goes back to antiquity. And one of the things they were trying to do was to create one. But that--as new data came in from the outer parts of the Solar System, we had to revise our classifications. And this is a key point of science, and therefore the whole thing is, at root, a scientific issue.
But you could also argue the opposite, in that, you know, the scientific issue was not really in doubt. Nobody was questioning whether Pluto and Eris and all those things ought to be in the same category as Jupiter. Clearly they're not. That wasn't the issue. The reason this became so controversial is because there were a lot of people who --scientists and non-scientists ‒ who thought that it would be nice if Pluto could remain a planet. And therefore, they came up with these rather convoluted definitions, in order to maintain the idea that Pluto should remain a planet. And then, they got into trouble, because fifty other things would, therefore, also have to be planets. But it's rooted in a non-scientific desire for Pluto to remain a planet, and for very few other things to be admitted to this pantheon. And that is fundamentally not a scientific thing, and you could argue that that's the whole root of the entire issue.
Now, one of the interesting things is that these non-scientific things affect the scientists too. A lot of you quoted this guy, Alan Stern, who's a planetary--a famous planetary scientist, who objected to the way it all ended up by saying, look, one of the definitions that they've put down is that you have to clear out your orbit. And Pluto doesn't make it in that--in that context, because it crosses the orbit of Neptune, which is a much bigger thing. But, Stern goes on to say, Neptune also crosses the orbit of Pluto. And so, obviously, there's some hidden assumption here about, you know, the thing that's much more massive counts, and the thing that's less massive doesn't count. But that hasn't actually been stated, and so this is a lousy definition. And so he objected on scientific grounds to this definition.
And some of you noted that Stern is the principal investigator of the New Horizons Mission[bk], but I don't think you noted the implications of that. The New Horizons Mission is a planetary probe that is on its way now to Pluto. And the reason that it was launched--Al Gore was actually very enthusiastic about this when he was Vice President. The reason that this was launched was because Pluto was the only one of the planets that Voyager didn't go to. And so, we have these fabulous pictures of, you know, Saturn and Uranus and Neptune. We have no fabulous pictures of Pluto because nothing had gone there. And in the late 1990s people thought, well, this is dumb. There is a planet out there that hasn't been explored. We've got to have a mission to go to this planet. So now, it's seven years later--the mission just went past Jupiter actually. So it's on its way out, and all of a sudden, the thing that it's going to has been demoted. This is awkward. [Laughter.] You know, we're spending 100 million dollars of your money to go see the last of the planets, and now it's not a planet anymore. And here's the guy who's in charge of that mission. And so, of course, he objects to the change in definition that demotes his object--which he's spending fifteen years of his life and 100 million dollars of your money to study--has now been kicked out of the realm of the planets. So, not surprising that he would take that particular point of view.
Mike Brown's another example. That's the guy who discovered Eris. And he has a lovely thing on his web site about how "planet" ought to be a cultural definition. And he kind of advocates for a thing where, because it's cultural, you've got to keep Pluto in. And because you've got to keep Pluto in, you've got to allow anything bigger than Pluto. So you just have an arbitrary, culturally enforced cutoff at the mass of Pluto. And then--and things that are more massive get to count also, because otherwise it would be unfair. Look what this does though. It means Eris is a planet and none of these other things are, which means Mike Brown is one of the four people in the history of humanity who has discovered a planet. [Laughter.] And so that's a very convenient definition. And so, you know--and then he actually very graciously goes on to say, well, I'll settle for being the discoverer of the largest dwarf planet until a bigger one gets discovered. But you can see, he's not really happy about it. He'd much rather the thing be decreed the tenth planet, and perhaps reasonably so. So, the scientists are also affected by these kinds of things in ways that you have to think a little bit about before--as you interpret what their take on the scientific parts of the controversy really are.
So let me summarize all of this--this is going to be--I mentioned in the first class that I was going to tell fables about science with morals attached to them, and that you could then explore these further in your optional paper, if you choose to write one. So here's a fable, which is "The Demotion of Pluto." And one could ascribe a variety of morals to this, but let me write down one version that happens to appeal to me, which is just the fact that I think science can be affected by culture. And you need to keep your eye on that kind of thing when you interpret things that scientists say; particularly if they're saying it to journalists. They're often much more circumspect in the things that actually get published in the journals. Okay.
There was one kind of argument that rubbed me the wrong way a little bit when some of you said it, which was--people had a little bit of a tendency to say, you know, all this definition and classification stuff, that's--the word 'trivial' or 'silly' is sometimes used. That's kind of unimportant, and it detracts from the science. And, I have to say, I don't agree with that. I think it's important for the science to get these classifications right, because otherwise you don't know how to describe what you're looking at. You don't know how to interpret it.
Chapter 2. Velocity and Center of Mass [00:08:53]
Oh--I should mention something about grading, I guess. It was six points on that problem. The way I did it was, I started out--everybody sort of started out with five of those six points, and if you said things that were incomplete or incoherent or dumb in some way, you got points taken off. But there was also an extra point you could get for being especially coherent or especially original or interesting, or just generally waking me up after I'd read forty others of them. I bring this up just to point out that if you get five out of six on that particular problem, that doesn't mean you've done anything wrong. It wasn't that we started with a perfect score of six and started subtracting things off. It just meant that I felt that there were others in the pile who were somehow more coherent. We'll hand these things back at the end of the class, by the way. And I'll make some remarks about grading of the overall problem set at the end. Okay.
Another general point that showed up in other parts of the problem set was a kind of issue about velocities and the center of mass. Let me--here's the center of mass of some orbit, and, of course, that's not a physical object. That's just a point in space. And the key thing to understand about the center of mass is, the center of mass doesn't move. It doesn't move in space. That's a fixed point in space. So, this doesn't move--actually I should be more precise. Its motion doesn't change. So, if it's stationary in some coordinate system, it sits there. If it's moving at some velocity, it continues to move at precisely that velocity. So the--it's--and then, you can redefine the coordinate system so it doesn't move in some other coordinate system. But it doesn't go around in circles or ellipses or anything. What does go around are the things going around it, one of which is the planet, which is over here--the other of which is the star, which is over here. And the way these two things move, they have to stay one on each side in a straight line that--woops, I'm going to miss--in a straight line that goes through the center of mass. I drew that wrong, so let me redraw it here. There we go. Yeah. And so it balances, right? That's what the center of mass is. It's the balance point. And so the star has to stay exactly opposite to the planet.
How big are each of these things? Well, that depends on the ratio of the masses in an equation we wrote down before. The consequence is that as these things go around they stay on opposite sides of the center of mass. So the amount of time it takes the planet to go around the center of mass--that's the orbital period--has to be the same as the amount of time it takes the star to go around the center of mass, also the orbital period. So the orbital periods, P, are required to be the same because it has to take them the same amount of time to go around this center of mass. Because they have to stay on opposite sides of it the whole time. The P is--So the orbital period, P, is the same for the planet and for the star, whereas the velocity and the semi-major axis are different. Because, while it takes the same amount of time to go around, the star is going for much less distance. So the distance is shorter, and therefore the velocity has to be less for the star. So we can talk about the Vstar versus Vplanet and a star versus a planet. And we can add these things up to makeV total and a total. But you don't do that with the period. The period is the same. Okay. So that's an important concept. Questions?
Let me point out that this concept of the center of mass gets more complicated when there's more than one planet. Because again, the center of mass is still a fixed point, even when you've got two planets ‒ and so one of the things--so the star is going around the center of mass because of this planet, but it's taking other extra little wiggles as a result--if there's a second planet, as a result of that planet. The center of mass has to stay exactly in the same place. And the consequence of this is that the motion of one planet is actually a little bit affected by the gravity of the other planet. So it, too, is executing extra little wiggles due to the presence of the second planet. Those wiggles are very small compared to the motion that's induced by the Sun, because the other planet's much less massive. But they really are there, and, in fact, the planet Neptune was discovered because the orbit of Uranus had extra wiggles in it that couldn't be accounted for by the known planets.
And so, in the nineteenth century, a couple of clever mathematicians figured out from the motion of Uranus where Neptune had to turn out to be, in order to explain these extra, unexplained motions. And then some astronomers looked, and there it was. It was a huge triumph for Newtonian physics and a damned hard math problem, too. And so, this concept becomes a little more complicated in the case where there are more than one planet. But in fact, the way we're going to deal with that is just to separate it into one planet at a time.
Let me give you an example of that. Let's see, I don't think we need to change the lighting. Woops! Backwards. Here we go. All right. So, this is a radial velocity curve of some star, and it--you can see these points. Here are the observed radial velocities at a variety of times over a course of three or four years. And then they've drawn in a sine curve--or it's actually not quite a sine curve. It's close to a sine curve. And you can see that the sine curve more or less goes through these points, which is nice because that indicates the presence of a planet. And you have velocity over here, but I should mention something about velocity.
What they mean is not actually velocity. What they mean here is radial velocity. And this is an important point. It's not that the speed changes. What changes is--between here and here on this plot ‒ is not the speed of the thing, but its direction. Because at plus 200, that means it's going away from you at 200 meters per second. At minus 200, it means it's coming toward you at 200 meters per second. That's why you can have a minus velocity. At zero, it does not mean that the thing has stopped. It's going at the same speed as it was up here and the same speed as it goes down here, but in a different direction. So, it's going still at 200-plus meters per second, only it's going sideways. And so it's neither coming toward you nor going away from you. Therefore, its radial velocity is zero, and you measure no Doppler shift. Remember these plots are created by measuring the Doppler shift, and the Doppler shift tells you how fast something is either coming toward you or going away from you. So, that's an important point. You can have dramatic changes from positive to negative in the radial velocity without changing the speed of the object at all. All you have to do is change its direction. So first, it comes toward you, then it goes sideways, then it goes away from you, then it comes sideways again.
So that's what this plot represents. And you can see that these points go up and down, as they should if something is in orbit around the center of mass. And these little points down at the bottom are--represent the difference; actually, they've put it down here, this should be zero on the scale. This is the difference between the observed points and this sinusoidal model that they've put up there. So, they've just calculated the differences, and there's some scatter. But it basically follows pretty well, the scatter is a whole lot less than the changes in the velocity.
But it turns out, you can do better than this. And here is an example. Now, what the line is now is not one, but two sine curves added together, one of which was the one we saw before. So they fit for two planets now. And the other is another sine curve with a different amplitude, because that planet induces a smaller motion in the star and also a different period. And so, at certain points, the periods line up and you get big deviations. Then at other points, you get wiggles on top of wiggles, and these things kind of beat against each other. So this complicated pattern of this line here is just two sine waves added together. And now, the points line up much better. If you recall, these deviations between the points in the lines before were, you know, of up to, say 50 meters a second. And now they're much smaller. The things fit much better. I'll show you a blowup now of this region of the plot where a lot of these points are, and you'll see what I mean.
Here are the points. Here is the line, and you can see that this complicated line really fits these points quite well. That's evidence that there are two planets in this system. But, in fact, it gets even better than that because what they then did was they said, all right. Here's what we're going to do. We're going to take these so-called residuals. We're going to subtract off our two-planet model. And we're going to see whether we can see anything interesting going on in what's left over after those two planets have been taken away. And when they did that, they saw this.
This is--they sort of grouped them all together, and they found something with a period of 1.9 days that now has what looks like a sinusoidal wiggle of about a few meters per second. Remember, where we started, the deviations were 200 meters a second, but you now subtract off this--these two planets ‒ and you're left with a third. And so this system is now known--this particular star that they were observing is now known to have three different planets around it, of which this one is the one that has the shortest orbit, 1.9 days. So there are now several examples of things in which we know that there's actually more than one planet in one of these systems. And this is how we find that out that the motion of the star is not just one sine curve, but the superposition of two ‒ or, in this case, even three of these things.
Now, one of the interesting things about this is it's quite a short orbit, 1.9 days. That's one of the shortest orbits known. It also has a relatively low amplitude. The velocity--the radial velocity changes are quite small. So, the induced speed in the star is quite small. Those two things put together give you a relatively low mass of the planet for reasons I'll make specific in just a second. This is one of the lowest mass planets that's been discovered in this way. It's only about ten times the Earth's mass. That's kind of comparable to--a little less than Neptune and Uranus. And so, in this case, it isn't actually clear whether you should think about this thing as a kind of low-mass outer planet or a big Earth-like rock. And so, that isn't clear in this particular case.
Let me make this a little more specific here. What are the inputs that you need to know to figure out how big--what the amplitude of that sine curve is--how big the wiggles are? You need to know a couple of things. You need to know the velocity of the planet, which isn't what you observe. Remember, you're observing the velocity of the star. So, velocity of the planet, which is approximately equal to the total velocity. As one of the exercises on your problem set, you can demonstrate that that is equal to GM / a, the square root of GM over a. So that means--Yeah?
[Unintelligible student voice.]
Oh, yes. Good. Thank you. [Adjusts overhead projector.] How about that? Yeah. Okay. So, this means short orbits give you small a, large velocities of the planet. This makes sense. If you're in close to the star, you have to move faster to keep yourself in orbit.
But, of course, you don't observe the velocity of the planet--you observe the velocity of the star. The velocity of the star is equal to the velocity of the planet, times the mass of the planet over the mass of the star. And so, large planet masses generate large star velocities. So the two things you need to know is: how short is the orbit and how massive is the planet. And so if you have a short orbit, that'll give you high V planet. And if you observe--so you observe the short orbit. And the other thing--if the other thing you observe is a low, relatively speaking, V star, then it must be true that you have a low planet mass. Because if this is big and this is small, you've got to compensate for it by having a small value out here. And we'll come back to this kind of reasoning in a minute.
Does that make sense? So in fact, that particular planet with its very short orbital period but its low induced velocity in the star--so short period, short semi-major axis, but also small V star, is the lowest mass planet, I think, at this point, that has been observed by this particular method. Okay.
Chapter 3. Observations of Hot Jupiters and the Selection Effect [bl][00:24:23]
But as it turns out, most of the ones--the short-period planets--that have been observed are more massive than that. And we've got these Hot Jupiters. And so the argument here, using the same kind of reasoning, is that you have short periods, moderate values, moderate to high values as these things go for V star, and that tells you it's a massive planet. And as I pointed out last time, this is deeply disturbing in terms of what we know or what we think we know about planetary formation. So, short period plus massive is, to put it mildly, unexpected--so unexpected that they almost weren't discovered at all.
What happened, this--the discovery of the planet around 51 Pegasus happened in 1995. And the way this worked out was, there was a team of astronomers, Geoff Marcy and Paul Butler, chief among them, in California, who had the best equipment for doing these kinds of very high-precision radial velocity measurements. And they had embarked on a campaign to find Jupiter-like planets, which they thought they could do. And they were piling up data on many stars. They were looking at many Sun-like stars. And then one day in 1995, they woke up and a bunch of people in Switzerland announced the discovery of the first planet, which disturbed them mightily, because they had been scooped. And, it disturbed them even more when they discovered that the particular star that this planet was around--this 51 Pegasus thing that I was talking about last time ‒ was one of the stars that they themselves had been observing.
But the thing was, the period, you remember, was four days. And Marcy and Butler and Co. were expecting the periods to turn out to be ten years. So they hadn't checked to see whether there were four-day variations. And as soon as this paper by these other astronomers, these Swiss astronomers who discovered the thing, was published, they said, damn! We've got a big pile of data on this particular object in our desk drawer. We ought to take a look and see whether these other guys are right. So they looked at it and within a week of re-analyzing their data, they were able to confirm the fact that this really was a planet in a four-day orbit. And, annoyingly to them, they already had the data that they could've announced it first, if they'd looked at it and asked the question, "Does this thing actually have a four-day orbit?" But it didn't occur to them because it's well known, you can't have a Jupiter in a four-day orbit. So, they kind of didn't check.
So here's another fable for you, "The Discovery of 51-Peg b." That's how you label these planets. A is the star, B is the planet. And the moral--I guess you could say this in a couple of ways. One would be to say, "Expect the unexpected." And the other would just be to say, "Look at your data." But look at your data so that you could see things that aren't the thing that you expect to see in your data. And that's kind of an important lesson, I think.
Anyway, it turned out, it was relatively easy to find these Hot Jupiters, and within a few years they--Marcy, and Butler, and the Swiss, and some other teams as well ‒ had found literally dozens of these things. So within a few years, there was dozens of Hot Jupiters known around many stars. And so they hadn't yet, of course, found anything like our own Solar System. Because they hadn't been looking for ten years yet. The orbit of Jupiter, you will remember, is ten years long. So, they found all these Hot Jupiters, and this might have suggested that ordinary Solar Systems are rare--Solar Systems like our own. Planetary systems are rare. But I'll put a question mark after that, because it isn't really at all clear that that's true. And the reason is that Hot Jupiters are easier to find than ordinary Solar Systems, for exactly the reasons that I wrote down just a minute ago. The fact that they have short periods and massive planets[bm] generates larger values ofVstar. Both of those factors make for large values of the thing that you're actually trying to observe, which is the velocity of the star.
So, of course, if you go out and you have some new technology and you're trying to observe something, the first ones you'll observe are the ones that have the largest signal of the kind you're trying to observe. So if you're observing radial velocities, you're trying to measure V star, the first ones that are going to pop out at you are the ones with large values of that.
It's also true that it's easier to observe these shorter periods. If you've got a four-day period and you observe the thing for a month, you've watched it go back and forth, you know, eight times or something. If you want to wait for eight orbital periods of Jupiter, that's 80 years--and it's just going to take you longer. There's a general rule in science that no project can take longer than it takes one graduate student to get a Ph.D. Because, of course, it's the graduate students who do all the work, and it's just hard to recruit a graduate student to work on a project that won't be completed until they're 70. And so these shorter periods are easier to observe, just because they're short, in addition to the fact that the thing you're observing is much easier to see.
This is called a "selection effect." So you're just more likely to see certain kinds of objects than others for the straight-forward reason that they're easier to see. And those will be the ones you find first. And if you don't take this into account in thinking about the statistics of these things, you're going to screw up because, of course, you see the easy ones first. Of course, you see lots of them before you see the others. Nevertheless, the existence of even one Hot Jupiter was a crisis for planetary formation theories. Because there's no way any such thing ought to exist. But even one Hot Jupiter messes up our theory; so, I'll just write that down, "messes up theory."
Chapter 4. Hot Jupiters - Double or Pulsating Stars? [00:31:55]
And so, as soon as even the first of these was discovered, people started to think about what the alternatives might be. And there are two kinds of alternatives, ways to explain the data without having a Hot Jupiter. So, alternative number one was that a so-called "low inclination double star" ‒ so, I'll explain that in a second. The second object in this is supposed to be a star, not a planet, and there are known double stars with short periods. They're formed in a very different way. Double stars don't form--the second star doesn't necessarily form out of a disk around the first star. It's formed--I don't know ‒ by splitting the star in half at some early part of its evolution. And so you get a very different expectation for what kinds of periods you have, and there are many double stars known with short periods of this kind. But so, then, how do you explain--if it was a double star, you would expect that the induced velocity would be much, much bigger because the star is much more massive. And so, what you do is, you explain it by saying, well, here is your--here is you observing it and the orbit, the orbital plane is like this. It goes up and down. So the stars are orbiting each other this way. So they neither come toward you very much, nor go away from you. And therefore, the velocity is high, but the radial velocity, which is the thing you observe, is low. So, high velocity, but low radial velocity because the system is going sideways--orbits are, the technical term here is "face-on," not "edge-on." Okay.
So, that was one hypothesis. This didn't work out for two reasons. Problem number one, no evidence for light from more than one star. Stars are much brighter than planets, right? So, if you're looking at a star-planet system, all you expect to see is the light from one star. And that's what is observed. If you've got a second star in that system, the second star shines like a star. And so, you would expect to see some evidence of light from a second star in that system, and none of those was observed.
The other problem is a kind of statistical one. There are many Hot Jupiters. Now, if you're going to explain all these things by having face-on orbits with respect to us, imagine what some observer somewhere else in the galaxy--with all these things--here's us in the middle of our galaxy, or somewhere in our galaxy. And all these objects happen to be lined up exactly face-on toward us. Some other astronomers would have to see them edge-on and so forth. So why is it--what cosmic conspiracy has caused all these things to be lined up face-on toward us? It's as if someone had carefully set up all these double star systems to fool us into thinking that Hot Jupiters existed.
This is the kind of argument that people tend to reject because it requires that we are in a very special place, or that some very special coincidence has taken place. And that isn't--and as you keep finding more and more of these things, you wonder, well, how come--aren't some of them lined up edge-on? And in fact, it has to be very close to face-on, and so the odds that all of these things are face-on to within plus or minus one degree starts to become really small as you pile up more and more of these objects. Many Hot Jupiters--they can't all be face-on. And so, as more and more of these things were discovered you could explain any one or perhaps two of them as being face-on star systems. But it starts to get more and more difficult to believe that all of them are in that category. Okay. Let me see--what do I want to do here? Okay.
Alternative number two is pulsating stars. Now, this is interesting. Stars do pulsate. The Sun pulsates just a little bit, not enough so that you could see it in this way, but there are other stars known that pulsate by large amounts. They go out, they go in. Think about what happens if you observe a pulsating star. Here it is when it's small but getting bigger. So, all of the star is expanding. But if you look at that star, you only see the half of the star that's on your side of the star. So you only see this part over here. And all of the surface of that star is coming toward you. Right? Because this part--it's expanding--so this part's coming toward you; this part's going half-sideways, half-toward you. This part's going half-sideways, half-toward you. So if you add up the light from all this, it has a net bulk motion coming toward you.
Now, supposing you look at it when it's at a different part of its pulsation cycle. So now it's big, but going--but falling in. Now, you'll see the opposite. All of the parts of this star are moving away from you. Some are moving sort of sideways, but others are moving away from you. And so you expect that if you observe a pulsating star you'll see first positive radial velocity, then negative radial velocity, then--as it pulses back out again--positive radial velocity. And that starts to sound very familiar. Right? That's pretty much what we observe. It goes up, it goes down. And so the suggestion was that these things might actually be some kind of pulsating star. Okay.
So, problems with the pulsating star explanation. Basically, solar-type stars, which these were--stars aren't supposed to pulsate like this--aren't supposed to have large pulsations. And it's also true that pulsations, in general, don't lead to sinusoidal variations in radial velocity. An orbit naturally gives rise to a sine wave[bn] if the orbit's close to circular. Pulsations--there's no particular reason to have that pattern. You could have sudden rises and then gradual decays and then things of that nature. You don't expect it to be sinusoidal.
Chapter 5. Measuring Doppler Shifts to Understand Hot Jupiters [00:39:49]
But both of these things--you know, what's weirder? That there a lot of Hot Jupiters in the world, or that you have some kind of pulsation mechanism that you haven't experienced before. Both of them are sort of equally in violation of current theory, and so you might as well assume that you have weird pulsations as well as having weird planets. However, it turns out that the pulsation theory makes a testable prediction. And to explain this prediction I have to take a little digression and talk a little bit about how Doppler shifts are actually measured.
So, measuring Doppler shifts. What you do is you look at what's called a spectrum. Those of you who--no, gosh, I've spelled that wrong. "Spectrum." Spectrum is just a plot of intensity, how much light there is, against wavelength. And if you work out--if you measure the spectrum of any particular astronomical object, you'll see that at certain wavelengths there is much less intensity or much more intensity than at many other wavelengths. So, you'll get a plot that looks kind of like this. There'll be certain specific wavelengths that have abnormally large or abnormally small amounts of light coming from them. These are referred to as spectral features[bo], or sometimes, lines. And when you have too little, these are called absorption lines. These are called emission lines because you have extra emission or absorption of radiation at those particular wavelengths.
There's a good explanation of why this happens from atomic physics. I won't go into it in detail, but let me just say that there are specific wavelengths with much less or much more emission--or more emission--and each one of those wavelengths is caused by atomic transitions, which emit more or absorb particular wavelengths of light. So, it's caused by atomic transitions. I won't explain what those are in detail, but each comes from a specific chemical element. So, hydrogen has particular wavelengths associated with it. Helium has particular wavelengths associated with it, and so on and so forth.
And this, by the way, is how you can determine what stars are made out of--determine composition of stars. But for the present purpose, the point is that you can go in with a bunch of hydrogen in the laboratory, and measure what the wavelengths of these spectral features are if nothing is moving. So--can measure these wavelengths at rest in a lab. And so you know in advance what the rest wavelengths of these things are. You go out and measure them in stars, and it turns out they're not quite where they're supposed to be. And that's how you determine what the Doppler shift of any particular object is, by comparing these spectral features to where they are in the lab.
Now, here's--so if we go back to talking about pulsations, so here is--this is kind of a blow-up of an absorption line[bp] this case. So here's intensity, and here's wavelength, and it looks something like this. And so there's a particular set of wavelengths that are absorbed. Now, if the whole star moves, if the star is moving because there's a planet around it--what happens when it gets redshifted? Well, this whole thing moves to the right to longer wavelengths, and you get something that looks, you know, sort of like this. So this is--whole star moves away from you. And so, the whole thing shifts back and forth.
But pulsations are a little bit different. When you get a redshift due to pulsation, it's because, you know, you're looking at something that does this. Part of the star moves away from you, but part of the star moves sideways. And so, only part of the emission is redshifted, but other parts of the emission are not. And so what you do is, you sort of--it's not like the whole thing moves sideways. It's that it sort of gets smushed out. Because part of the star moves sideways, but--part of the absorption line moves sideways, but part of the absorption line doesn't move because it's coming; you know, it's, like, coming from this part of the star, which is going sideways to you. And so what you do is you get something that looks more like this.
So this is--part of the star moves away. So the center of this line has moved. Here's the center here. It's gotten even more redshifted than in the case I drew there. But part of it has been left behind. And so the prediction is that for pulsations the shape of these spectral features changes--shape of "lines" change--whereas for orbital motion, only the position of the lines change.
So this can be observed. You can go out and observe, and you can see whether the shape of the lines change or not. And they did that, and it's not pulsation, but is consistent with orbits.
I think this is kind of a cool experiment. Because, you know, this looks a lot like science. Right? There's two hypotheses, each of which makes a different prediction. Prediction one--hypothesis one, it's got to change its shape. Hypothesis two, it does not change its shape. You go out, you measure the thing, and you find out which hypothesis is right. This is just what they told you in eighth grade and, therefore, just what I told you a couple of days ago never happens in astronomy. But sometimes it does. And so this is yet another fable, "The Disproof of Pulsation as Explanation for the Velocity Curves." And the moral here is, "sometimes science works like science."
So there were, for several years, all of these attempts to try and explain the Hot Jupiter, the radial velocity curves, without actually having to bite the bullet and believe that Hot Jupiters exist. None of them were very convincing. This double star hypothesis didn't seem to work out. The pulsation hypothesis didn't seem to work out. But nevertheless, people kept trying to come up with alternative explanations, until something happened that pretty much nailed down the idea that these things really, honest-to-goodness, are planets. But I don't have time to tell you about that now, so we'll talk about it on Thursday. Okay.
[end of transcript]
ASTR 160 - Lecture 6 - Microlensing, Astrometry and Other Methods
Chapter 1. Complexities and New Observations on Hot Jupiters [00:00:00]
Professor Charles Bailyn: You'll recall that where we got to last time is that there are lots of Hot Jupiters; lots of Hot Jupiters. And the alternative theories that were presented to explain the evidence for Hot Jupiters--the evidence for Hot Jupiters comes in this form of these velocity curves, where you plot the radial velocity versus time of the star. And the star goes back and forth, and you infer from that that there must be a planet going around it, which is pulling the star back and forth. And some alternative explanations were proposed to explain these kinds of data. Those alternative explanations didn't seem to work very well, and so you have to kind of take the Hot Jupiters seriously.
Before I go on, let me mention that, by now, Hot Jupiters are not the only kind of planets that have been seen this way. There are also planets in--now known to have much longer orbits, up to a few years. These are harder to see for two reasons. First of all, it takes you a few years to see them. And second of all, when the orbits get longer, the velocities that they induce go down, because things in long orbits go slowly. But, nevertheless, now we've been able to see a bunch of things.
Oddly, in many cases, they turn out to have highly elliptical orbits, in some cases. Not the Hot Jupiters, not the ones that are close in. Those all are more or less circular. But some of these longer ones have highly elliptical orbits. That's also very weird in terms of our theories of planetary formation because one of the things that our theories were designed to explain was the fact that all the major planets in our own Solar System have orbits that are close to circular. It does a very good job of explaining that and then, naturally enough, has trouble explaining the ones we see that are in highly elliptical orbits--highly elliptical--yes, I didn't--highly elliptical orbits, in some cases. And just so you know, the way you recognize a highly elliptical orbit is it's not sinusoidal anymore. It's got some other shape. So, these come in: periodic but non-sinusoidal velocity curves.
So, all this is very amusing and you pile up all these very strange kinds of planets, or what you think are planets. But there's still sort of the nagging question of whether these radial velocity curves might be explainable in some other way. And it would be awfully nice to have evidence of some other kind for the existence of these planets.
This is, you know, what happens in science. You find some kind of fairly strong evidence for something, but it would be way stronger if you found two different kinds of evidence. Different--collected in different ways or reflecting different aspects of what you're observing that both point in the same direction.
And, at a certain point along the way, about six years ago or so, a new kind of evidence for the existence of these planets was discovered. And the first such case, which is now a very famous star for this reason, was something called HD209458; that's the name of the star. And this was a Hot Jupiter system. So, this is the name of the star; Hot Jupiter was discovered in the usual way by Doppler measurements, by radial velocity measurements.
And then, something else was discovered. So, let me show what they found in this system. All right, so let me explain what's plotted here. This is the brightness of this system, not the radial velocity this time--the brightness against time. And so, here it is on the 9th of September, 1999. And somebody is measuring the brightness of this thing. And it's set up in units so that the average brightness is 1. And you can see, these measurements have a little bit of error in them. They scatter around. And then, at a certain point there's a dip in the brightness of the star[bq] for a few hours; notice this is in days. This is a tenth of a day, so 2.4 hours, something like that. So, for a few hours the brightness of this thing dips down to about 98% of its--of the brightness it has, so 2--it loses 2% of its brightness for a little while and then it comes back up.
And then, interestingly enough, seven nights later on the night of the 16th of September, it did the same thing. Now, seven nights is an important number for this particular system, because it turns out that the orbital period of its Hot Jupiter, which was already known at the time, is three and a half days. So, this is exactly two orbits later. The exact same dip occurred. You couldn't see it one orbit later because three and a half days later it's daytime, and one of the features of astronomy is that you do it at night. And so you have to wait two day--two orbits to see the same thing again.
So, every orbit--there appears to be this little dip. And what is happening is that this is a system that's almost exactly edge-on. And what's happening is that the planet is passing in front of the star, and once per orbit the planet gets in the way of the star. The planet's this little thing, the star's a big thing. And a small amount of the star's light is obscured by the planet. This is called a transit. So, let me just write that down. And then, transits are discovered--yeah, okay, we'll come back to the overheads in a minute because I want to show you more plots. And it's the planet getting in the way of the starlight. And what this tells you, also, is how big the planet is, because you've got a little disc in front of a big disc. And the amount of light that's obscured--this 2%--tells you what the ratio of the area projected by the planet, compared to the area projected by the entire star, is.
So, this gives you an additional piece of information. You already know the mass of the thing because you've measured the radial velocity. Now, we also know its size. So, this was very interesting. And it is, as I was saying just a second ago, an entirely different kind of confirmation of the existence of this planet. So, there's no pulsation going on here, because some--you not only are getting the changes in velocity of the planet you're seeing--of the star, you're also seeing the light of the star diminish when the planet passes in front of it.
Chapter 2. Discovery of Planetary Transits [00:07:38]
And then, so, they decided this was interesting, and so they did this same experiment, except with this Hubble Space Telescope[br] instead of with some ground-based telescope. This is what you see with Hubble, and you can see why Hubble is a better telescope than the ground-based stuff. This is exactly the same plot. This is the average brightness of the system outside of the transit, so this is 1.000. This is .985 so it's dropped down 1.5% in brightness. This is in days and in--this is a tenth of a day here, each of these big ticks is .05 of a day. And here is the star going along perfectly normally. And you get better measurements because you're not distorted by the atmosphere. And then, all of a sudden, the thing drops and it gets--has this very particular shape to the light curve[bs], to the curve of brightness with time.
This shape is perfectly explained by the hypothesis that you're passing an opaque disc across the surface of the star. As the disc touches the star it starts to--and gradually more and more of the disc is over the star. You get this steep drop here. And then, this rounded part down on the bottom comes about because when you look at a star, the center of the star, the central portion of the star looks a little bit brighter than the edges because, if you think about looking at a sphere, if you look at the center, you're looking right at it. If you're looking at the side, you're sort of grazing the edge and it turns out there is something called "limb darkening," which comes about because of this. So, stars, if you look at the Sun for example, the edges of the Sun look a little fainter than the middle. And so, what happens is, as this disc passes across the face of the star, it obscures successively brighter parts of the star until you get down to here. Then, it obscures gradually fainter parts of the star until it gets to the edge. Now, the disc is--as it goes up here, is passing beyond the edge of the star.
So, this is exactly the shape of a light curve you would predict if you passed an opaque disc in front of a star. And it really works out remarkably well. In fact, there's a line underneath these points, you can see it off here and off here, which is a prediction. And you can't see the line because it's under the point so nicely. So, this works out incredibly well. This is almost for sure an opaque disc, namely the planet, passing in front of the star.
So, transits are discovered--the dip in light due to planet passing across the star. Now, this does not happen in every Hot Jupiter, because you have to be lined up pretty, pretty perfectly in order for the planet to pass in front of the star. That is to say if--here's you, here's an observer, here's the star. And, if the planet--if the orbital plane of the planet looks like this, then when the planet's in front of the star, it'll be below it. So, if you think about it, imagine a planet that's orbiting like this. Here's its star. And it never passes in front of the star, because when it's in front of the star, it's below the star. Whereas, if it--if it's exactly edge-on, then once per orbit, it will pass in front of the star. But, you have to have a very precise alignment for that to take place--so, requires a precisely edge-on alignment. But, if you have such an alignment, you know how these dips ought to line up with the radial velocity curve.
So, now what you see is, you measure the brightness of the star versus time, and you see these dips. Here's a dip. Then one orbit later, you get another dip, and so forth. If you then, at the same time, measure the radial velocity--and again, this is the radial velocity of the star--then you know how this has to take place. Because here you are. You're looking at it. And the moment where the dip takes place, the planet's got to be exactly in front of the star. That means the planet is at this point in its orbit, going that way, for example, and the star is in this part of its orbit, going that way--which means this--the radial velocity at the moment the dip occurs has to be zero. Because for them to be lined up, one in front of the other, they've both got to be going sideways. And shortly before that, the star was moving away from you, because they're moving into position, like this. Shortly afterwards, the star is coming towards you. And, remember that positive radial velocities are coming toward--or going away from you, negative velocities are coming towards you. So it used to be--it used to be going away from you, positive. It's now at zero at the point of the dip. And then it's going to be coming towards you, so it has to be that these dips take place at that point in the curve. And so, here again, it's got to be like this. And so, the way this has to work out is something like this. So, you can predict what the radial velocity has to be at the particular moment where the transit occurs.
And so this works. This works for HD--what is it? 209458. So this works out. So, now you've got a lot of evidence that this really is a planet. Not only is it moving the star back and forth the way you expect a planet to do, it's also passing in front of that star at exactly the moment you expect it to pass in front of the star, and the shape of the dip that it creates is exactly what you would expect if you pass an opaque disc in front of a star. So now, you've got a whole bunch of different kinds of evidence. You can ask, "Does this prove it's a planet?"
And then you get into this problem with scientific proof. What does it mean to prove something in science? You could probably figure out some clever way that it's actually a pulsating star, which has a star spot on it that somehow precisely mimics exactly the way a planet would behave. Impossible that this would--well not--I should be careful with that word. Highly improbably that this would actually occur in real life, so I think, you know--people have the feeling that science is truth, somehow, and that, you know, that you can prove things in science, kind of, to a mathematical certainty.
That actually isn't the case. The legal standard, you know, which you're familiar from cop shows, of beyond a reasonable doubt, applies in science as well. And that's actually a more appropriate standard to use for anything, which, in the law or in the natural world, in which you try and reason by induction. And so I would say that this, plus this, plus the shape of the--of the spectral lines, which we talked about last time, plus the shape of these dips--that's proof way beyond a reasonable doubt that there's a planet around this particular star. And that really ended the conversation. Yes?
Student: Is it always directly edge-on or could there be a case in which it's [inaudible]
Professor Charles Bailyn: Right.
Student: --sort of like a little bit below or a little bit [inaudible]
Professor Charles Bailyn: So, is it always edge-on? Well, orbits don't change, so for this object it's always edge-on. For most objects, it is not edge-on, and so, in fact, what had happened was, by the time they discovered this one, there were a couple of dozen of Hot Jupiters known. None of the rest of them do this, because in all the rest of them, the orbit isn't aligned properly, and so the planet never goes in front of the star. And so, in the vast majority of cases, you don't get this. And so, they only discovered this after they'd found so many of them, that one of them turned out to be aligned properly, you know, just by chance.
Student: Is there--it possible for an orbit to not--never pass in front of the center of the star?
Professor Charles Bailyn: No. What it does is it passes--it's got to do this, it's got to have some moment where the planet is as far towards you as it can be, and then it turns around and comes back. But for most orbits, at that point, the planet will either be below or above the star from your line of sigh[bt]t. So, imagine this orbit as the planet goes--here's a star. Planet's going around the star. It reaches its furthest forward point, but it's well below the star from your line of sight. So, it depends on the angle of the orbital plane. Does that make sense?
Student: It, it doesn't have to pass through the center of the star, it could pass [inaudible]
Professor Charles Bailyn: Oh, oh --
Student: [inaudible.]
Professor Charles Bailyn: Yes, sorry, exactly right. It doesn't have to pass through the center of the star. It can graze the tip at the bottom of the star a little bit. And in fact, in this object, you can tell how close to the center it goes by the exact shape of the curvature down at the bottom of that light curve. Because, you know what the expected distribution of brightness across the face of the star is. You also know something about the radius of the star. This is supposed to be a solar-type star, presumably has a radius of the Sun. If it passes across, sort of grazes the bottom, then the dip will be shorter, because it will pass through faster. And so, you can figure out exactly what the trajectory across the thing is. Most of the time it misses. And in this case, you can figure out that the angle of the inclination, so-called, which is 90 degrees if it's exactly edge-on, is 80--I think 88 point something, I don't remember the answer. Because, it doesn't go exactly across the center, it goes, sort of, sort of halfway down.
So yeah, that actually gives you additional information. How long the dip is and what the exact shape of the thing, tells you which part of the star it passes across. Yes good, thanks Bethany. Other questions about this? Yeah?
Student: Have we ever discovered a planet through transit without having discovered it previously?
Professor Charles Bailyn: Right, have we discovered a planet through transit without having discovered the previous radial velocity curves? Yes, and we'll get to that. Because, let me just say this: as soon as this was discovered, people got way excited, because it's quite difficult to make these kinds of precise radial velocity measurements. You have to have very specialized equipment. Only a few people in the world can do it. There's this bunch of people in California who can do it. There's this bunch of people in Switzerland who can do it.
Us ‒ normal astronomers, don't have that kind of expertise and equipment, but measuring a change in brightness of a star by 2%, that's easy. I can do it up on Science Hill [an area of the Yale campus where the Astronomy Department is located] in our little observatory up there. In fact, I have done it for this star. You can--if the timing were better, this star is up in the summertime, unfortunately. If it were up in the fall we would have this be an exercise in Astro 155 [a Yale Astronomy class], because it's entirely straightforward to go and measure a 2% difference in brightness in a star. Anybody, you know, with 2,000 bucks' worth of equipment, you can go out into your backyard and do this experiment. This is a big deal.
Chapter 3. Limits of Finding Planets Directly from Transits [00:19:53]
So, as soon as that was possible, everybody got fired up, you know, "I'm going to play this game myself." And we all laid very elaborate plans for going out and finding zillions of planets. And the problem is that it has to be exactly aligned edge-on for this to even occur. And so, most stars with planets--this doesn't happen. And so, you would have to observe many, many, many stars in order to see this one time. So you have to--while it's easy to do for any one particular object, it's hard to discover them this way because you have to do it in bulk. You have to look at many stars at once.
So then, people thought, well, great, we know how to do this. We'll look at many stars at once. We'll take pictures of star clusters, of--where there are lots and lots of stars. And we'll just keep taking pictures of these star clusters over and over again. You'll look at 30,000 stars at a time, and if one of them has a dip, we'll find that dip. And so, the way we'll deal with the fact that this doesn't always occur is by looking at star clusters. And so, they tried this, again, with the space telescope, because it works better at doing this kind of thing.
The problem with star clusters is that the stars are really close to each other, so from the ground it just looks like a mush. In this case, you have to see the stars separately. So, they took a particular star cluster--also the advantage of doing it from space is no daytime, and so, you can observe continuously. So, they took eight consecutive days of Hubble Space Telescope time and did nothing but look at a star cluster, a cluster called--famous cluster called 47 Tuc, 37 stars. They took repeated images of this star cluster, and they figured, we ought to see some number of planets by the transit method[bu], first, in this cluster.
So just, here's what the cluster looks like. So this, on the left, is a ground-based picture of this cluster, and you can see what the problem with observing this stuff from the ground is. If you look down in the middle, it's all mushed together. You wouldn't be able to pick out individual stars. But then, this box here, blown up to the right-hand side of the picture--this is what that little box looks like from the Hubble Space Telescope. And now, you have the resolution to observe each of these stars, or many of them individually. And so they took eight nights of Hubble Space Telescope time--that's a lot of time on the space telescope. The space telescope costs about a $1,000,000 a day to run. And so, this is 8,000,000 bucks' worth of observing time.
Okay, so what did they expect to see? So, finding planets directly from transits. And so, they observe a cluster of stars--30,000 stars at a time. So, what do you expect? Well, it turns out, from the radial velocity studies, they had gone and looked at a lot of, sort of, Sun-like stars. So, 30,000 more or less Sun-like stars, I should specify, from the radial velocity measurements from the Doppler measurements. They got answers like approximately 1 out of 10 stars--this is a rough estimate ‒ have Hot Jupiters. And then, how precisely aligned do they have to be? Approximately 1 out of 100 Hot Jupiters is aligned properly to get a transit.
And so, now, you have a prediction. You look at 30,000 stars. A tenth of them have planets, that's 3,000 planets. One hundredth of those will be aligned up in such a way that you can see a transit. That's thirty transits. Predict-- thirty transits. And it was that kind of calculation--this is just a rough estimate, but they had done this much more precisely. It was that kind of estimate that persuaded the people at the Space Telescope Institute to allocate all these many hours of space telescope time to this project.
The result was zero transits, none. Not seen. And this was a little distressing, except it didn't take people very long to figure out that they should have known this in advance. And this is--you know, you get a result and then of course people--you get an unexpected result, and then people start writing papers which say, well, of course that's what you should have gotten. Any fool could have predicted that you would not see any transits in a star cluster, except none of the fools did.
Let's see, so--but, in retrospect, it was clear that this wasn't going to give you the thing you thought because of two factors. First, in--why? So, first factor: in clusters, the stars are really close together. Stars--they sometimes collide or more often have near collisions. And when a star comes cruising into your planetary system, the star has a lot of gravity. It's going to completely wreck the orbits of the planets because you're going to have the gravity of a second star. And it turns out that what this does is it liberates the planets. And so, it will disrupt planetary orbits. So, you kind of don't expect there to be any planet; you expect there to be planets in the cluster, but they'll be free floating planets sort of wandering around the cluster, because they will have been detached from their parent star by incoming stars--by close encounters with other stars in the cluster.
Put it this way. The nearest star to the Sun, beside the Sun, Alpha Cen, is about a parsec away. In a cubic parsec, at the center of one of these clusters, there are a million stars. And so, there are a million stars packed into the space where only one star exists in our corner of the galaxy. So, they run around--you know, if you were in a cluster, if you were in a planet on a cluster, and you were looking up at the sky, the constellations would change from year to year, because the stars are so nearby that their motions would be readily apparent. And once every few hundred million years, a star would come cruising into your Solar System and detach all of the planets from the star. And so, you don't expect there to be any planets.
You also don't expect there to be any planets for an entirely different reason, which is, one of the things that had been discovered as they were piling up all these Hot Jupiters found by the Doppler Shift method, is that stars are more likely to have planets--have planets--if they have high amounts of heavy elements--heavy elements. Now, let me explain that. Most stars--stars are mostly hydrogen and helium. Astronomers do chemistry in a very peculiar way. We have--we consider there are three kinds of things in the universe. There's hydrogen, there's helium, and there's metal. Chemists--everything else is a metal. If don't care if it's oxygen, carbon, whatever. The chemists get really uncomfortable with this. But, you know, it's like the supposed primitive tribes. I'm not sure these--this actually exists, but the linguists say there are tribes in the world where they count one, two and many. Well, this is how astrono--I don't know if such tribes exist except for the astronomers, who really do. And we count, one, two, and many. And we call any chemical element heavier than helium a metal.
Chapter 4. Metallicity[bv] and Planetary Migration [00:28:54]
So, we have this concept called metallicity, which is defined to be the fraction of something of elements heavier than hydrogen and helium, which are the first two in the Periodic Table, as you probably know. So, everything else is a metal. The metallicity of the Sun--Sun's metallicity--is about 2%. And the metallicity of the Solar System is therefore about 2%, because the Sun's got all the mass. And, high metallicity stars, by which I mean, metallicities greater than the Sun--greater than solar--are more likely to have planets.
This makes perfect sense. This is the first thing in a little while that's made any sense--because, how do you make a planet? Well, planets aren't made out of hydrogen and helium. Planets are made out of the other stuff. We're made out of silicon and iron, and the--Jupiter's got a lot of ice, and so all these kinds of heavy elements--you don't make--you can't make a planet if all you've got is hydrogen and helium because there's nothing solid to have it form. And the only way you get to keep your hydrogen and helium, the 98% of the stuff that's hydrogen and helium, is if you already have a big core of heavier--either rocks, or ice, or something else--if you already have some metallic, in the astronomical sense, core. And so this makes perfect sense. If you don't have any metals, you can't be forming planets.
And star clusters of the kind that Hubble observe are known, and this particular one is, to consist of low metallicity stars. In the case of 47 Tuc, the one we looked at, it's--the metallicity of the thing is, I think, about a fifth that of the Sun. So, it's got very substantially fewer heavy elements. So, no planets.
So, in two different ways this was a mistake, right? But that was only realized afterwards. And, it's unfortunate that it was a mistake in two different ways. Because if it was a mistake in only one different way you would have learned something from this, because you would have confirmed the idea that a star--close stellar encounters strip planets off of stars--except maybe it's only because of the low metallicity. Or, you would have confirmed the idea that low metallicity stars can't have planets; except in this case, maybe it's just because of the stars and the planets have been stripped away. So it's kind of unfortunate that there were two excellent explanations different from each other about why you should have predicted this result before you obtained it.
However, having done that, it was clear what the next experiment had to be: that you wanted to go out and try and measure these transits in some region that's a little less dense, and a whole lot more metal rich. So, next experiment, which was done last summer, didn't look at a star cluster. It looked at the center--a region close to the center of the galaxy. So, this is lots of stars, but significantly less dense than what you would get in the center of a cluster.
Fortunately, they had put up a bigger camera into the space telescope since then, so you could cover more of the sky, which was useful. This is the camera; by the way, you may have read, over the weekend, that Hubble's had a little bit of a problem. The electronics in this wide field camera have shorted out. And so, Hubble's kind of in trouble for--until they get the next visit, because its major camera is now blind. And this happened, I should say, 12 hours after the deadline for submitting proposals. So, there had been almost 1,000 proposals submitted from around the world, of which, maybe only a fifth would ever get done. People in our department and basically every department in the whole--astronomy department in the whole world were going nuts trying to prepare their detailed proposals for using the thing. They submitted them, and a few hours later it broke. And so, then there was this nice little email from the people at the Space Telescope Institute saying, "uhh, you might want to reconsider, and we've created a new deadline three weeks from now so that you can revise and extend."
There are other instruments that still work but the cameras aren't as good. And so, now, everybody's scratching their head and thinking, can I actually do this, and if I can, what's the good strategy? Do I want to try and do it now when the competition's going to be much less because the instruments are lousy? Or, do I want to wait until after September 2008, when they're scheduled to go up replace the camera and repair the thing, and try and do it with the good instruments then, when everybody else in the world is going to want to do their experiment? And so, we're all grappling with this at the moment.
However, last summer this was working like crazy. And they did another one of these ten consecutive days of observations, but this time of the center of the galaxy, which has lots of stars--but less dense than in the center of the cluster, and also has the advantage that many of these stars, most of them, are high metallicity stars. So, hopefully, this will work, right? Because you've eliminated both of the excellent reasons why it didn't work the last time.
So, here is the field of view that they were looking at. This is a tiny piece of the center of the galaxy. Lots and lots and lots of stars, which is good, because you want to see them. And these little circles here, which are numbered from 1 to 16, I believe, are circles around little Sun-like stars. You can see the stars in the middle of those circles; you probably have a hard time seeing. Let's turn the lights down. This is kind of a nice picture. This is what the center of the galaxy looks like to the Hubble Space Telescope. And these bright things--the colors are sort of quasi-real. These things are red giant stars and solar type stars. The center of the galaxy is quite far away--are really quite faint, you can barely see it. See in the middle of this circle there's a little star there, that's a Sun-like star in the middle of the galaxy. And these circles are these stars in which they found--in which they found transits. So, in this case, it worked. So, it's true that one or the other or both of those reasons they had why it didn't work in the star cluster, were in fact the reason it didn't work in the star clusters. Because here's a situation where those problems don't exist. And now they found sixteen of these things, which is pretty close to the amount you would have expected.
And so now it is--these are planets, which have been discovered first by the transit method. I should say, there are a couple of others that have been discovered. First by the transit method, from people at the ground just going out and looking at random stars. And in some of those cases, they have been done the opposite thing, and gone back and found the radial velocity measurements after having discovered the tran--the planet by transits. You can't do radial velocity on these guys because they're too faint, and it's just not going to work out.
Okay, how're we doing? All right. Now, a couple of consequences of this. If you have both radial velocity measurements, which tell you the mass of the planet, and transits, which tell you the radius of the planet, then you know something very important. You know the density. Density--then, you get the density.
Density is usually written down with the Greek letter ρ, for some reason, which I don't understand, but it's always done that way, so we'll do it too. And density is defined as mass of something divided by its volume. And so, for a spherical object, the volume--if you go back to some geometry book, you can look this up. 4⁄3 π times the radius cubed, and that's the density.
The density, if you--the density of water is about--is 1 gram per cubic centimeter. Now, of course, that's a lousy set of units. We do things in kilograms per cubic meter. That's, as it turns out, 1,000 kilograms per cubic meter. So, if you picture a cubic meter, that's a pretty huge aquarium. It's actually pretty heavy. And, let's see, is this right? 102, 106 times a gram--yeah, that's right. And, in fact, interestingly enough, this is the definition of a gram. This is where they came up with that metric unit--is to make it work out so that the density of water is one--is exactly 1 gram per cubic centimeter. You have to specify the temperature, too, because--but, so, that's a typical density of water, which is on ice, right?
Rocks have higher density--much higher density. That's why a handful of iron is heavier than an equivalent sized handful of snow, or something like that. So, if you know the density, you can tell something about the composition of the planet. And it turns out that the Hot Jupiters, in the few cases we now have--it's not just one case, it's several cases--Hot Jupiters have low density. They really are ice balls. They're not made out of rock. And so, an idea you might have had about where the Hot Jupiters come from is, well, in these high metallicity stars, there's just a whole bunch more rock, and the Earth-like planets kind of get big. But that isn't what happened. These things really are made out of ice. And now you have a problem, because you know how far away they are from the star. And the temperature of these things--the surface temperature of these things is, like, 1,000 degrees. This is not a good place to put a snowball, all right? You put a snowball in some place which is 1,000 degrees--we won't specify the place--and something bad is going to happen to it.
Now, the--and so, therefore, how could these planets have formed? And so the idea--the current thinking on this is an idea called migration. And the idea behind migration is that you make Jupiters in the Outer Solar System, where they belong. And then, through some mechanism, which people have ideas about, but which aren't--isn't at the moment really specified--these things, after they are formed, they migrate into the Inner Solar System. And the reason this is a useful thing to do is that a big thing melts slowly. The reason for that is that the surface area to volume ratio is low. Volume goes up as the cube of the radius--surface area, goes up--as the square. If you shine a light on something, the amount of energy it picks up depends on how big it is, not on how massive it is. And so, changes of temperature in interacting with your environment are less, the bigger you are. This is why, by the way, arctic animals tend to be big: because they're trying to survive in an environment that's much colder than they are. And so, they generate energy by their volume and they lose it out their skin, by their surface area. So, you want to have a lot of volume compared to your surface area. Big things melt slowly. So, you can't have ice planetesimals in the Inner Solar System. But you can have something the size of Jupiter. And it'll melt, but it'll take longer than the age of the Solar System, or even the age of the universe, to do so.
So this is the idea. And of course, the key point here is this migration. And there are ideas about why this should happen, but it isn't wholly clear.
Chapter 5. Consequences and Limits of the Idea of Planetary Migration [00:43:32]
Now, one thing, a consequence of this idea, is that there are no terrestrial planets. No terrestrial planets, because as this Jupiter is moving inward, if there's an Earth in the way, it's going to either knock it out of its orbit completely, or the Earth will run into Jupiter and become incorporated into that planet. So, if you've got a Jupiter-size system in--near where your Earth-like planet is orbiting, that Earth-like planet's in big trouble for exactly the same reason the planets are in trouble, in general, when another star comes through, because you've got something much more massive coming by, screwing up your orbit. So, there are no terrestrial planets. Their orbits are disrupted by the migrating Jupiter.
Now, in fact, I have to qualify this a little. There was a paper that showed up in the literature, a few months back, with some clever way of preserving the terrestrial planets as the Jupiter came by. I have to say, I don't fully appreciate the force of this argument. It is perhaps true--because I haven't read the paper carefully enough, but I feel obliged to mention that somebody, at least, has an idea about how you can avoid it. But, in sort of straightforward terms, you don't expect there to be terrestrial planets in a situation where a Jupiter has migrated from the Outer Solar System to the Inner Solar System. Questions? How are we doing? Yes?
Student: I was just wondering what caused the Hot Jupiters to migrate?
Professor Charles Bailyn: What causes the Hot Jupiters to migrate? This is a subject of some discussion among the experts. The idea is that when the Jupiter forms, remember it forms out of a disc of gas? There might still be a substantial residual gas and dust disc. And as the Jupiter plows through it, the friction with that disc slows it down. And if you slow down the orbit of a planet, it'll gradually fall inwards. That's one idea.
There are some--there are other ideas. But it isn't clear. And if it were clear, you would have predicted it to happen. And indeed, there's a whole problem with the migration theory. So, problem with migration is, sometimes it doesn't work. Because, Jupiter in our Solar System is where Jupiter is. It didn't migrate. It has to work--needs--so, the problem with the migration system is, it needs to work, but not always. It also can't work too well, because if it works too well, then the Jupiter falls right into the Sun, right? So, it has to work most of the time, but not all the time, but not too well. This is a complicated balancing act. And, whatever theory you propose, whether it's this friction with a dust disc, or anything else, you've got a little problem with this whole concept. Because you have to tune this mechanism up so that it takes most Jupiters, moves them into the Inner Solar System, and then stops working at just the right point to leave you with a whole bunch of Hot Jupiters, most but not all of the time.
All right, that's as much as we know about it. That's--you know, you got to come back three years from now and see if we've straightened this out, because that's where we are at the moment. All right, more later.
[end of transcript]
ASTR 160 - Lecture 7 - Direct Imaging of Exoplanets
Chapter 1. Calculating Planetary Density from Transits and Doppler Shifts [00:00:00]
Professor Charles Bailyn: So, we've been talking about transits and I want to say a couple things more just to round out that discussion. You'll recall how this works. Transits--you get light blocked--light from the star blocked by the planet. And in order for this to occur, the orbit has to be exactly edge-on; otherwise, the planet doesn't actually get in the way between you and the star. So, must be edge-on. And so, what you see, basically, although you're too far away to see it in this kind of detail, looks something like this. Here's a star, it's got this big, bright, shining disc, and then crossing that star is a darker disc from the planet. So, it looks like you have a little spot there. And it's clear, just from the geometry of this situation, how much light is obscured. It's basically the ratio of the cross-section of the[bw] planet to that of the star. So, the depth of the transit, and by that I mean, you know, the fraction of the light that is obscured, is equal to--that will be, the cross-section of the planet divided by the cross-section of the star. And the cross-section is just the projected area. And so, what that means in practice is, here's the radius of the star, and there's an equivalent radius of the planet. And it's just the ratio of the projected areas.
Now, the area of a circle, projected area of a sphere is a circle. The area of a circle, you probably remember from geometry, is πr2. And som what this is going to be is πr of the planet squared, divided by πr of the star squared and theπs cancel. So, it's the ratio of the squares of the radii.
Okay, so to take an example--supposing you were an astronomer in some distant place and you're looking at the--at our own Solar System. And you're fortunate enough to be in a place where you can see our Solar System edge-on. What would you see when the Earth transits the Sun?
So the Earth's--so here's an example: Earth transiting the Sun. The radius of the Earth, it turns out, is something like 7 x 106 meters. The radius of the Sun is about 100 times that, 7 x 108 meters. And so, the depth of such a transit is the square of the ratios of these radii.
(7 x 106) / (7 x 108)2
That's (10 -2)2 = 10-4 , or 0.01%.
So, that's a lot less than what you found in section yesterday for a Jupiter-like planet. And the key is in this r2 factor, until the Earth is about 1/10--has about 1/10 the radius, is about 1/10 the size of Jupiter. But that tenth gets squared, so that's 100. And so, instead of getting a 1% dip in the light, or approximately 1%, you get a 1/100 of 1%.
1/100 x 1% = 10-4.
So, as the planet gets smaller you--it becomes harder and harder to see these transits. And, if you think back on the pictures of these light curves, the graphs that were made, in the observations from the ground, you really needed to have about a 1% dip in order to be able to see it. From space you can do a lot better. Things are much more stable, and you might well be able to see something like this, but only from space and not necessarily from the ground.
Now, having done this little calculation, of course, in real life, you do it backwards. What I did here was I assumed that I knew what the radius is, and I calculated what the transit would be. That isn't how it works with extra solar planets because, of course, you don't know what the radius is. And instead, what happens is, you see the transit. And you see the transit, and you work backwards to figure out what the radius is. You have to make some assumption about what the radius of the star is likely to be. And so, basically, observing a transit is a way to get the radius of the star.
So transits give you the radius--and this is nice, because the radial velocity method, the Doppler shift method--Doppler measurements ‒ also give you something about the star. But it's the mass not the radius. And then, if you have both of these things, then you get to put them together and figure out what the density is. And that's why observing both of these things in the same system is so useful.
So let's do this again for the Earth. The mass of the Earth is 6 x 1024 kilograms. The radius of the Earth we just figured out, 7 x 106 meters. And, our hypothetical astronomers out there in the rest of the galaxy somewhere would have been able to determine this if they saw the transit. So now, what is the density? Density is this Greek letter ρ, symbolically, and that is equal to mass over volume, which is equal to mass over 4⁄3 πr) 3.
π = 3. So that cancels, which is helpful. And let's see, so the mass on top, 6 x 1024 divided by 4, times this quantity cubed. Now, what do we do about that? 7 x 7 = 50, right? So, this is 7 x 50, which is 350. So let's see, this is equal to (6 x 1024) / (4 x 350 x (106)3), which is 1018, 6 x 3 = 18. And so what's this? Oh! I don't know; this is 1,400. And so this, then, in turn, is equal to (6 x 1024) / (1.4 x 1021) because this is 1.4 x 103 x 1018.
6 / 1.4 = 4, give or take, times 103. And that's the answer, that's the density.
In what units? Let's see, this had better be kilograms per meter cubed. It's an MKS calculation. Why? Because that's what I started with, kilograms and meters. 4 x 103 kilograms per meter cubed, what does that tell you? What does that tell you? Four times more dense than water, excellent. So, this is 4 times water. Water is defined to be 103 kilograms per meter cubed--density of water--or rather, a kilogram is defined so that water has that particular density. It's 4 times water. That makes it a rocky planet, because the ices and the gases that make up a typical gas giant planet[bx] don't get--don't achieve that kind of density.
And so, our hypothetical astronomers observing this transit would have determined not only that the Earth is there, but also that it's got to be made out of rocks. And that is an additional piece of information that's really useful in trying to figure out what's going on in these kinds of systems. Okay.
Chapter 2. Astrometry to Assess Planetary Position [00:09:14]
Now, it turns out that there are some other methods for identifying planets around other stars. And I want to talk about one of them. And the reason I haven't talked about this one more is because it hasn't yet discovered any planets around other stars. There have been lots of planets discovered by the radial velocity method. There have been lots of planets discovered now by transits, now with the latest Hubble Space Telescope results, but those are not the first methods that were tried. For a long time, people have been trying something else, and it hasn't really worked. And this is called astrometry, so here's another method.
Astrometry means "measuring stars" in Greek. And basically what this is, is it's determining the positions of stars to extremely high accuracy. Remember, the whole game here is that the star moves, too. And we've been using Doppler shift measurements to measure the velocity of the star, the radial velocity of the star, as it goes round and round. But you could, in principle, also try and figure out that the actual position of the star in space moves a little bit too.
So, observing change in position of the star--now that change is quite small. And you'll recall that we started out a few weeks ago saying, you know, you don't see the star all that accurately because of atmospheric distortion and optical problems in your telescope. You just see this big blob of light. And the key point here is that it is actually not--if you have enough light, you can determine the center of a big blob of light really quite accurately. Determine the center of a blob of light to much greater accuracy than the extent of the blob. So, you know, I take a picture of a star and I see something that kind of looks like this. And that's big and ugly and hard to deal with, except, you know, the accuracy of the position of that blob isn't limited by the extent. You know that the center is somewhere around here. And if that blob were to move slightly so that the center took a little--went around in circles like this, you'd actually be able to see that as this big blob sort of moves slowly around. And that's the trick with astrometry. So, you do these repeated measurements of the precise position of the star, and you ought to be able to see it going around in circles.
So, we have, in fact, all the equations we need to deal with this already. And so, let's just go straight to a particular exercise, a calculation. How big a change in the Sun's position due to the planet Jupiter, because that's the most massive and will make the most difference, would you see if you're on Alpha Centauri?--would an Alpha Centauri astronomer observe? So here's the situation: you're sitting on Alpha Centauri. You're looking back--which is the nearest star, you may recall. You're looking back at the Solar System, and you're hoping to see the change in movement of the Sun due to the presence of the planet Jupiter.
So, the first thing to say about this is, what do we mean by change in position? Change in position. What we're talking about is an angle. We talked about this in a different context before. Here's the observer. Here's the star. And the star's moving, it's going to move up to here. And what we want is to draw this triangle, and we want an angle. And then D2 over here is the amount by which the star moves, D1 over here is the distance to the star. And we want the angular change in position, because that's what we mean when we make a position measurement in space. Okay, so that's the first thing is to understand what the answer ought to look like. It's got to be some kind of angle.
And then the second thing is, I've done my usual trick here of not giving you a whole bunch of information that you're going to need. And so, the first thing you have to do in order to line up--try and set up the answer is you have to figure out some actual answer. So, the mass of the Sun is obviously equal to the mass of the Sun; that's easy. The mass of Jupiter is equal to 2 x 1027 kilograms, that's 1/1000 of the mass of the Sun. The distance from Alpha Cen to us--Sun--from Alpha Cen to the Sun is about 1 parsec. I think I mentioned that before, because this is the closest star that there is. And the semi-major axis of Jupiter's orbit is equal to 5 Astronomical Units. I wrote that down on the first day of class. So you're going to need all this information.
Now, here's the trick; here's Jupiter doing its 5 Astronomical Unit thing, and then the Sun in the middle. Here's the center of mass, center of mass. And the Sun is doing a little circuit in the other direction, always making sure that it's on the other side of the center of mass from the planet. That's what a center of mass means, right? And then we can take--at one point here's the--let's say, here's the Sun and here's Jupiter. And we take this little line here, and the whole of the distance here is atotal. And the distance from the planet to the center of mass is aplanet, and this tiny little distance here isastar. And what we need to look for is astar in this case, because we're watching the star go round in circles, not the planet.
And then, the usual equations apply where Mstarastar is equal to Mplanet aplanet. We've seen this equation in dealing with velocities, but it's the same thing in distances, because, the time that it takes to go around these circles is one orbital period--is the same in both cases. So, if the velocity is slower, then you cover less ground. Or, to put it a different way, if you're going in a smaller circle, you're not moving as fast. So, it's the same equation.
And so, let's do this. astar = (Mplanet / Mstar) x aplanet. That's 5 A.U. in the case of--in this particular case. And I've already said that the mass of the planet is equal to 10-3 times the mass of the star here. So, this is 10-3. So, this is 5 x 10-3Astronomical Units. That's how far the--that's the radius of the Sun's orbit around the center of mass with Jupiter, if you want to think of it that way. But that's not the answer we want. We want an angle. And this in A.U., and this, here, in parsecs, will give us angle in arc seconds.
And this is a particularly easy one. We already have 5 x 10-3 A.U., and the distance is 1 parsec. And so, this is 5 x 10-3arc seconds. Five milli-arc seconds. Now, that's much smaller than the size of the blob of light from Alpha Centauri. But, as I said, you can see the motion of the center of a blob of light to fairly high accuracy, and this is pretty readily observable. So, folks sitting on Alpha Centauri would know that the--who have our kind--our level of technology would already know that Jupiter exists from this method.
Interestingly, we can look at Alpha Centauri, right? You can do this backwards and you get exactly the same answer, because Alpha Centauri is a Sun-like star, has exactly the same mass, and we don't observe any such motion in Alpha Cen. And so, there is no Jupiter-like planet around Alpha Cen. We know that because if there had been, we would have seen it through this--through this method.
Now, you can do the same thing, let me do it quickly, for the Earth. Supposing you want to detect the Earth in this way. So aplanet--so this is for Earth. a of the planet is now 1 A.U. instead of 5 A.U.s. Mass of the planet is 6 x 1024.
So mass of the planet over mass of the star is (6 x 1024) / (2 x 1030). That's 3 x 10-6. And so the a of the Sun due to the Earth now, not due to Jupiter, is equal to 1 A.U. That's the size of the planet times the ratio of the masses, which is 3 x 10-6. So it's 3 x 10-6 A.U., much less than for Jupiter, which was 5 x 10-3. And then, Alpha equals D2 / D1.
(3 x 10-6) / 1.
Three micro-arc seconds. This is not observable, at least not with current technology. So, our friends on Alpha Centauri, who know that there's Jupiter, don't yet know that Earth exists, because this is so much smaller than the effect due to Jupiter.
And it's smaller for two different reasons. One reason is that the mass of Earth is small, so this ratio is small. The other is that the Earth's orbit is shorter, so it's 1 A.U. instead of 5 A.U. So, you're multiplying two numbers together. Instead of multiplying 5 by 10-3, you're multiplying 1 by 10-6. And so, both of those numbers are smaller. And so, the effect is that much smaller. So we can't yet--our friends on Alpha Centauri can't tell whether we have Earths, and likewise we can't tell whether Alpha Centauri has an Earth.
So, one of the interesting things about the astrometry method[by], and this is why I bring the whole thing up, is that it favors big orbits. The bigger the orbit, the bigger the motion of both the star and the planet. This is exactly opposite to what happens with the radial velocity method. Radial velocity method favors small orbits, because in small orbits, things go faster, and you're looking at the velocity. So, this favors big orbits, and that's the opposite of radial velocity measurements. And it also favors massive planets: the more massive the planet, the better off you'll be, which is the same as the radial velocity method.
And so, this is useful, one of the--if you're trying to figure out what kinds of things are out there, it's helpful to be looking with several different methods, which select for different kinds of objects that you can look for. And so, you can call these selection effects. And, you know, if you're looking at radial velocities, you're going to miss all the large orbit stars. And so, it would be nice to also look with astrometry, so that you can see other kinds of stars--other kinds of planets.
Now, let's see. The astrometry method has one other feature that it needs--star needs to be nearby. This is a--this is a question that doesn't arise in radial velocity, and it's because of this term. It's because of this term here. You're looking for alpha. So, even once you figure it out, how much the star moves, you've got to divide by the distance of the star. So, for example, if you're looking at something 10 parsecs away instead of 1 parsec away then you've got only 1/10 the effect. And so, while people sitting on Alpha Centauri can see the effect of Jupiter, people ten times further away, on some other star, which is still quite close in galactic terms, would not be able to see that exact same effect even though, of course, the Sun's moving the same way regardless of who's looking at it. The further away you get, the smaller the effect becomes. That's why nobody's--largely, I think, that's why nobody has successfully used the astrometry effect, because it only works out well on very nearby stars, and there's just a limited number of those to look at.
Chapter 3. Summary of Planetary Identification Methods [00:23:55]
And so, let me summarize all these different methods now--oh good. By just making a little table of the so-called selection effects. These are what kinds of things are easy to see and what kinds of things are not so easy to see for a given method. And we've got three different methods, so let's make a little table here. Method; what kind of orbits get picked out; what kind of planets get picked for a given orbit; and other considerations. And here we go.
So, the first one we talked about was radial velocities. This is the Doppler shift, and this picks out short or small orbits. Short if you're thinking about the period, small if you're thinking about the semi-major axis, because the smaller the orbit, the faster the planet has to go, and therefore, the faster the star has to respond. It picks out massive planets, because the more massive the planet, the greater the reflex motion of the star. And you'll recall that it does make a difference how the thing is oriented. If it's less than edge-on you see only part of the motion, so it helps a little to be close to edge-on.
Now, for the next method, which are transits, where the star gets in the way, this criteria that you have to be edge-on is much, much more important. Because, in the case of the radial velocity, you know, if you're not edge-on, it sort of gradually becomes a smaller, and smaller, and smaller effect. But gradually, there's no big moment where you can't see it at all. But with transits, if you're not edge-on, you don't see anything. It's not that the effect gets smaller, it's that the effect disappears altogether if you're not sufficiently edge-on so that the planet gets away--gets in the way of your line of sight to the star. This also favors short or small orbits. But--and that's because it has to be edge-on. How close to edge-on you have to be depends on how far the star is from the planet.
Here's what I mean. Here's the star and here's the--here's you. And, supposing there's a planet here, then that will just get in the way. But if there's a planet here a little further away on that same--in the same kind of orbit, only more distant, then it doesn't get in the way. And so more distant--let me phrase that differently. Larger semi-major axis makes it harder to have a transit. You have to--closer to edge-on. If you were out here, you'd have to--see here, anything within this little angle here will cause a transit. But if you're out here, let's see, it would have to be anything within this smaller angle. Does that make sense? Yeah, it's just, the further away you hold your thumb from your eye, the less you have to move your arm to cover a given thing.
All right. And also, in this case, for transits, let's see, the planet has to be large, physically, in terms of its size. And so, it's not so much the mass, but the size of the thing that matters. So, if you have a big, but light, planet, a big fluffy thing, that'll work well for transits, but not so well for radial velocities.
Then, finally, this astrometry method I just described favors large orbits in contrast to the other effects. It is irrelevant whether it's edge-on, because if it's face-on, then the star goes around in a circle, like this, and, you can see it. If it's edge-on, the star goes around in a circle like this, and you see it moving back and forth as if it was in a line, so you can do it either way. So, that's irrelevant, but has to be nearby--must be nearby. And, like the radial velocity method, you favor massive planets. So, these are three of the methods that are commonly being used now. Yes, question?
Student: So, does the orbit have to be larger between methods so that the center of mass is sufficiently far away?
Professor Charles Bailyn: Yes. So the--yes, that's exactly right. The orbit has to be large so that the center of mass has to be sufficiently far away from the star, so that it travels a big enough distance to be able to see. That's exactly right.
There's one more method that's commonly in use called "microlensing," which is really cool, but I'm not going to talk about it, because it's a relativistic method and so we haven't talked about relativity yet. We'll cycle back and talk about this later on in the course. And this has actually worked, and I will restrain myself from trying to explain it in the remaining fifteen minutes of this particular segment of the course. We'll come back to it. But this sort of set of selection effects is a good thing to know, because then, if you do all of these things and you compare them to each other, and each method has a different selection effect, then you have a fighting chance of figuring out what's actually out there rather than what you are simply able to see because of the particular method you're using. S,o it's a good idea to be trying to do all of these things at once.
Okay, let me end this segment by talking about some space missions--yes, question yes?
Student: So essentially there's--if there's a similar tech--people of technology somewhere out there, they can't see this?
Professor Charles Bailyn: We can--yes, so there--if there's people elsewhere with our technology, they can't detect the Earth. That is the same as saying we can't detect Earths around other stars. That is the case right now. However, technology marches on, and, as I'll show you, in ten, fifteen years, that may no longer be true. So, if the aliens out there are even fifteen years further advanced than we are in technology, they might know that we're here. Other questions, yes?
Student: Even supposing that we could detect the Earth around another star, would the presence of a more massive planet sort of mess that up so that we can't?
Professor Charles Bailyn: Would the presence of a more massive planet disrupt our potential detections of an Earth-like planet? Not necessarily. Remember, I showed you that--the radial velocity curves where they had detected several planets in the same system? What you do is you take the effect of the massive planet, you figure out what the mass and orientation of the massive planet is, and you remove that from your data and then you look for the little wiggles left over. And you could do that effectively with any of these methods. The example I showed was the radial velocity thing, where there were superposed sine curves, but you could also do it--there could be three different transits, and so you'd get a big lump for the big star, and then a little lump for the little star. And if the little star's closer, you'd get them more often. And, similarly, in astrometry, you could get it moving back and forth due to a massive planet, and then a motion on top of that due to some other planet. So it--for--in all of these cases the effect of one massive planet could be taken out so that you could see the result.
Now, what's perhaps more important is, the presence of the massive planet could screw up the orbit of the Earth-like planet. This whole migration idea--this Jupiter comes cruising into the Inner Solar System, and then us earthlings are in trouble because our orbit gets disrupted and we fall into the Sun, or something like that. So, the bigger problem is not detecting it, but whether it permits the planet to be there at all. Other questions? Yes?
Student: Will we get our problem sets back?
Professor Charles Bailyn: Will you get your problem set back? Yes, that's an easy question, end of the class. Other questions? Yeah.
Student: Will you be posting the slides before the test?
Professor Charles Bailyn: We'll post these slides before the test, yes, yeah. Other things, yes?
Student: Why is it that when you calculate a it's not actually--this was the method you were just doing, the astrometry method--why is it not 2a because it's going from one side of the center of mass to the other?
Professor Charles Bailyn: Oh, the--a is defined as the semi-major axis. It's just a definition thing.
Student: But isn't the star going [inaudible]
Professor Charles Bailyn: Yes, so the star travels a circle with radius a, so you're right. It goes from one side to the other, so the distance the star goes is actually 2a. And so that's just a definition question of--
Student: But is it--can't you observe the star at one point or another?
Professor Charles Bailyn: Yes, you're right. So that the total angular change is--you're right, is actually 2a. And what I was calculating there is the radius of the little circle that it goes around. But you're absolutely right the--in fact the distance--it's like for the radial velocity method, the actual change in radial velocity is from the peak to the trough, but the number we quote is the amplitude of the sine curve, so you're right about that. Other questions?
Chapter 4. Kepler, SIM, and TPF [00:34:12]
Okay, let me show you some things in--work in progress, and in particular space missions that are being planned to explore this further. So, the first of these is the so-called Kepler Mission, which is going to look for transits. I showed you the Hubble Space Telescope, transit curve, which is much, much better than anything you can do from the ground. So, obviously the place to look for transits is in space. From space you could see transits the size of Earths--of planets the size of Earth, whereas from the ground, you wouldn't be able to see that.
And also--and so what they want to do is send up a mission that's going to do nothing but make high precision measurements of stars in order to look for transits. So, the problem with the space telescope is everybody wants to use it for all kinds of things. There's relatively little--limited amounts of time for any one particular project. It's also not perfectly designed for making these kinds of transits observations, so this is going to be a mission which is set up for the express purpose of making very high precision measurements of the brightness of stars over, and over, and over again.
And the problem with this is just the general problem with transits: that you only see the ones that are edge-on. So, you've got to look at lots and lots of stars. Even if lots of them have planets, you'll only see a few transits. But this is designed to carry out that mission, so they're going to be lots of transits observed, including transits from Earth-like--from Earth-sized stars. So, this will be the first moment when this thing gets launched that we'll really have a good handle on being able to detect an Earth-sized planet. So, if the aliens have launched their equivalent of Kepler, they're looking at us right now, provided our Solar System happens to be exactly edge-on from their perspective. This is due to launch in a year or two. It's under construction. It's ready to roll, and this thing will be up in space taking data by the time--within the next couple of years. So, that's an exciting thing to look forward to.
A little bit further into the future is something called SIM, this is the Space Interferometry Mission, and this does astrometry. And it's going to improve the accuracy of positions of stars from what we now have, which is in the milli-arc second range, 1/1000 of an arc second, to the micro-arc second range, 1/1,000,000 of an arc second. And again, as we just did in that little calculation, that will, in principle, enable us to look for Earth-like systems.
Now, the limitation on this is that--is this business that for astrometry, you have to look at nearby stars, and the nearer the star, the better. And if you get far out into these--into the galaxy, then the method becomes less sensitive. It's also true that, you know, this method favors long orbits, and space missions tend not to last for forty years. And so, if you're looking for Neptune, which has, you know, a many-decade-long orbit, it's not clear that this is going to be around for long enough to actually make those measurements.
So, this astrometry thing is kind of squeezed between the requirement of the method to have long orbits and the requirement of human beings to get results in a relatively short amount of time. Nevertheless, this will be a factor of a thousand improvement over what we can do from the ground. This mission is authorized. It's kind of under construction, but it's one of those things where it's going to launch in five to seven years. That was also true five to seven years ago. And it will probably--on our pessimistic days we think it will still be true five to seven years from now. It's always five years in the future, both for technical reasons, and for funding and political reasons. But there's some feeling that one of these days they'll actually get around to doing it. But it's certainly further in the future than the Kepler Mission is.
And then, the great granddaddy of all planet missions is something called the Terrestrial Planet Finder, the TPF. This is a huge NASA commitment, and they want to directly image the planet. So, this is fundamentally different from everything else. This is--we're going to actually take a picture of the light from the planet. We're going to give up this silly business of observing the star to infer the presence of the planet. We're actually going to look at the planet itself. In order to do that, you have to get rid of the light from the star. You have to blank out the light of the star, because otherwise, as we saw, it'll drown out the planet.
And there are a couple of different ways you can do it. One is basically just masking. You just put a big opaque thing somewhere in the optical path of the telescope, and it just blocks out the light of the star, but it's carefully sized so that the light of stuff around it can still get in. There are also more sophisticated optical methods--something called interferometry, which I won't explain right now, which can have the same effect of nulling out the light from the star. And so, we then observe the planetary light directly.
The best way to do this is not in optical light[bz] but in infrared. Optical light is where stars give out most of their light. Planets give out most of their light in the infrared. You may be aware, we all glow in the dark, but we glow in the dark in the infrared, that's why the military uses those interesting infrared goggles, which turn everything green. What those do is they take infrared photons and they ingest infrared photons. And they emit green light so that you can see infrared, and that's how they do these night vision goggles. And that's because at the temperatures on ordinary planets, we glow in the infrared, which is why you don't see each other glowing in the dark, because your eyes don't detect infrared. But if you're going to be looking for planets, you're much better off looking in the infrared than in ordinary light.
And then, once you can see the light from a planet, you get to do a really cool thing, which is, you get to examine the spectrum of that planet to find out what the atmosphere is made of. And we talked a little bit about spectral features, which come from different atoms or molecules. And once you actually see the light from the planet as opposed to the light from the star, you can actually study in detail what that star's--what that planet's atmosphere is made of.
This, by the way, is how one goes about detecting life on planet Earth. There was a very cute experiment a little while ago. They were sending a mission to Jupiter, the Galileo Mission, which is now at Jupiter doing science. But the way they did it was funny. They sent it not outward toward Jupiter, but inward toward Venus. It took a swing around Venus. It turns out, if you do it right, and you swing around a planet, you can pick up extra speed. And so, to get this thing out to Jupiter, they had it swing around Venus, then come back to Earth and swing around Earth. And each time it did one of these swings, it picked up speed, so it got to Jupiter actually faster that way--a very clever bit of orbital dynamics[ca].
But the consequence of it was that this mission, one of our prime missions to look at other planets with all the various instruments that we like to look at other planets with, swung by near to Earth. And so, somebody had the very clever idea, let's use our standard suite of exploration instruments and see if we can detect the existence of life on Earth using one of the satellites that we used to explore the rest of the Solar System. And people had all kinds of thoughts about what would be detectable--you know, cities at night, you know, you would be able to see lights on the dark side, the Great Wall of China, you would be able to detect--no. Turns out that the strongest sign of life on Earth is the fact that the atmosphere contains methane.
Now, the atmosphere, of course, has a lot of oxygen. Methane, you may recall, is CH4, and if you put a little bit of methane into an oxygen atmosphere it immediately dissociates and you get water and carbon dioxide because of all the free oxygen. So there shouldn't be any methane in the atmosphere, but there is, and you can detect it by looking at the infrared spectrum of the atmosphere.
Now, what does it mean that there's methane in our atmosphere? It means there's a continuous source of methane pumping into the atmosphere all the time. What is the source of that methane? It is, as Carl Sagan, delicately put it, bovine flatulence. Cow farts. And just digestion, in general, has an output of methane, which is continually piping into the atmosphere. And if that weren't happening, that happens from biological activity, and if that weren't happening, there wouldn't be any methane observable in the atmosphere.
So, what you do is, if you find some other planet, if you look at the atmospheric chemistry[cb], and you see if there's something in there that's out of equilibrium that could only be continually replenished by biological activity. And having both oxygen and methane at the same time is one such indicator. So, the hope would be that we could not only see the light from the planet, but we'd be able to detect the presence of biological activity as well. So how do you go about doing this? Bovine flatulence equals life--words to live by.
Let's see, so here's how you do it. You need to have very high resolution; you need to be able to separate the light from the star, from the light from the planet, to the greatest extent possible. Turns out, the way you do this is you have space telescopes spaced pretty widely apart. That gives you the best handle on the resolution. But they have to know where each other is to a precision very substantially greater than the wavelength of the light that they're observing. And so, they need to be able to tell the distance apart of these things to tiny fractions of a meter--"picometer metrology" is the technical word. A picometer is 10-12 meters and metrology is just measuring how far apart you are.
So, they need to be able to figure out--to formation fly, and know how far apart they are to about the width of an atom or so. You want to image in the infrared. Mid-infrared imaging wants you to--pushes you beyond Jupiter. The problem is that inside the orbit of Jupiter, there's all this warm dust in our Solar System. And so, it's like the sky is bright all the time from all the infrared emission, from the dust. So, you've got to go out into the colder parts of the Solar System to do this.
So we're--what we're going to do, the plan is, you're going to build a half dozen or so things, each of which is about ten times the size of the space telescope. We're going to move them out beyond Jupiter and formation fly them in this--to this extremely high precision. This is not something we're capable of doing right now. But there is a twenty-five year-old; twenty-five year so-called roadmap, a series of missions along the way, which is going to simultaneously be good missions in their own right, and develop the technology.
SIM is one of these missions. It's going to develop the high precision spatial imaging that you need for this. JWST is the acronym for the next-generation space telescope, which is due to be launched in 2012. That's basically one such telescope, but orbiting the Earth. That's a milestone. And there are various other milestones along this roadmap. And the hope is that in twenty-five years, with, you know, 25 to 50 billion dollars, we could actually do this thing.
And so, here's the little artist's conception of these guys flying in formation outside of the orbit of Jupiter. Then, I guess this represents the Sun down in the middle of the Solar System. They're looking out this way, finding life on other planets. And the big problem with this whole mission is that it's been cancelled, because a decision has been made that it's--this is a very big, expensive mission, and the decision has been made that if you're going to do something big and expensive, you ought to go to Mars, instead. Put people on Mars, instead. However, this is a twenty-five year time scale. Things get cancelled and un-cancelled every three or four years, so, who knows exactly what's going to happen. And I think this may reappear in the NASA plan at some point in the future. And that's sort of the ultimate that people can think of now in terms of find--studying planets around other stars. Okay, that's what I got to say about this, and a test on Thursday.
[end of transcript]
ASTR 160 - Lecture 8 - Introduction to Black Holes
Chapter 1. Introduction [00:00:00]
Professor Charles Bailyn: Okay, welcome to the second part of Astro 160. This is going to be about black holes and relativity. And just to give you kind of a preview, the whole point of black holes is that, of course, they emit no light, so you can't see them directly. And so, the question arises, "How do you know that they're there?" And the reason you can demonstrate that black holes exist is because they're in orbit around other things and you can see the motion of the other things that interact gravitationally with the black hole.
This concept should be familiar, to a certain extent, because it's exactly the same thing we've been doing for discovering exoplanets. You don't see the exoplanet directly. What happens is that there's something else that you can see that's affected by the presence of the exoplanet. So, exactly the same thing happens with black holes. And so, we're going to use the same equations, the same concepts, to explore this very different context. So, black holes can't be seen directly. And so, instead of detecting them directly, you use this combination of orbital dynamics and things like the Doppler shift to infer their presence, and more than just inferring their presence, to infer their properties.
Now, the context is more complicated. And, in particular, we're no longer going to be using Newton's laws ‒ Newton's Law of Gravity, Newton's Laws of Motion--because there is a more comprehensive theory that replaced Newton, which is necessary to understand these things. That more complex theory is Einstein's Theory of Relativity. So, we're going to be using some relativity rather than Newtonian physics. This gets weird very fast, okay? And so, I'm not going to start there. I'm going to start with a kind of Newtonian explanation for what black holes are, we'll do that this time, and then the weirdness will start on Thursday.
Chapter 2. Escape Velocity [00:02:38]
So, the first concept and the easiest way, I think, to understand black holes is the concept of the escape velocity. This is a piece of high school physics. Some of you may have encountered it before. And it just means how fast you have to go to escape from the gravitational field of a given object. If you go outside and you shoot up a rocket ship or something like that, how fast do you have to shoot it up so that it doesn't fall back to the Earth? And so, you can define an escape velocity for the Earth, or for any other object for that matter, which is just how fast you have to go to escape its gravitational field.
There is an equation associated with this. It looks like this, Vescape, that's the escape velocity, 2GM / R all to the ½ power. And this is the speed required to escape the gravitational field of an object; supposing that the object has mass equal toM and radius equal to R. Oh, one other assumption, I'm assuming here that you're standing on the--that you start from standing on the surface of the object. If you are on the surface. Okay.
This equation should look vaguely, but not a hundred percent familiar to you, because you derived something that looked a lot like it on the second problem set, where you worked out the relationship between the semi-major axis of an orbit and the speed and object had to go in to be in that orbit, and what--the way that calculation worked out it was the velocity equals GM over the semi-major axis, a. So that 2 wasn't there in that derivation, but otherwise, the form of this is actually quite similar to that.
And so, let me explain why that is. Here's some object. It's got a radius of R and a mass of M. And imagine that you've got something that's in orbit around this object, but it's in orbit right above the surface. It's just skimming the surface of the thing. That would be impossible in the case of Earth, because the friction from the atmosphere would slow you down, but in a planet without an atmosphere, this would be possible. Imagine you're just sort of skimming over the tops of the mountains, or whatever. So here you are in orbit, this is something in a nice circular orbit right above the surface of this object, and it's going around. And it's got some velocity, which I'm going to call the circular velocity. And as we calculated in the previous section of the course, that's GM / a, which is, in this case, GM / R, because you're skimming the surface, to the ½ power. So that's how fast you have to go to stay in orbit. If you go slower than that--let's take a different color, here. If you go slower than that, you crash into the surface right away, because you don't--you're not going fast enough to stay in orbit. So, that's what happens in the case--if you have a velocity less than the circular velocity.
What happens if you're going faster than the circular velocity? Well, you're going so fast that you move further away from this object. You don't stay skimming the surface. So, here you are, going a little bit faster. And now you're not in a circular orbit and your orbit ends up looking something like this--nice elliptical orbit. And this is a velocity greater than the circular velocity, but still less than the escape velocity because you haven't escaped the gravitational field, because you're still in an orbit. It's an elliptical orbit now, but you're still in an orbit, and it'll come back to the same place.
Now, if you're going at somewhat faster than that at the escape velocity, then you never come back. You continue all the way out to infinity. Your orbit continues to change direction a little bit due to the gravitational force of this thing. You continue to slow down, but in the end you never come back. So, it's a non-repeating orbit. And, if you're going even faster than the escape velocity, then you get to infinity even faster. And, more importantly, when you get there, you're still moving pretty fast. This, you gradually slow down.
So, all of these different kinds of orbits--the one that crashes into the planet, the one that skims the planet, the one that's an elliptical orbit, the one that escapes altogether--those are all within a factor of the square root of 2 of each other. Because, remember, the escape velocity here is equal to (2GM / R)½. So, just by increasing your orbital speed by a factor of the square root of 2, you go from being in a nice circular orbit to escaping the gravitational field of the object altogether.
So, you can calculate escape velocities of things. Let's do that once. The escape velocity of Earth--that would be--the escape is (2GM / R)½.
2G = 7 x 10-11
M is, for the Earth, is 6 x 1024
R for the Earth is something like 7 x 106. This all has to be taken to the ½ power. The 7s cancel. What do we have here? Let's see, 12 x 1013.
24 - 11 over 106
½--let's see, that's 1.2.
14 - 6 = 8, times 108, to the ½. That's something like 104 meters per second, because I've used the value of G that's appropriate for meters per second. So, that's about 10 kilometers a second. So, that's the escape velocity of the Earth. If you go outside, you throw a football up into the air at 10 kilometers per second, it's not going to come back down. Try it--good exercise.
Okay, you could calculate the escape velocity of any particular object. You could calculate the escape velocity of the human being--of a human. A human has a mass of 100 kilograms, a radius of about 1 meter; this is kind of a big human, but we'll go with it. Let's see, Vescape is equal to 2GM over--a half--there's a very famous book about physics with the title, "Assume A Spherical Cow," and this--so, this is the kind of thing that physicists like to do. It's an idealized situation. We have this perfectly spherical human being and--okay so let's do the calculation, 2 x 7 x 10-11 x 100, that's 102, over 1, to the square root. That's 14 x 10-9. Call it (1.4 x 10-8)½. That's something like 1.2, let's call it 1.
1 x 10-4 meters per second. Or--let's see, that's 1/10 of a millimeter per second. That's less than 1 meter per hour. And that's why we don't go into orbit around each other. Okay? Because you're always moving way, way, way faster than the escape velocity of the people you're interacting with. The escape velocity of the Earth is 10 kilometers a second. So, you're not moving that fast. So, you're bound to the Earth. But when you're hanging around with your friends, you're probably going faster than 1 meter per hour, and therefore you're moving faster than the escape velocity. You don't feel a great effect of the gravitational force of other people. This is kind of anti-Valentine's Day calculation, right? Because it proves that human beings are not attracted to each other; at least not by the force of gravity. And so, you can do this calculation for any given object.
Chapter 3. Defining Black Holes and the Schwarzschild Radius[cc] [00:12:12]
Fine, so what's a black hole? Black hole has, actually, a very simple definition. A black hole is simply something in which the escape velocity is greater than or equal to the speed of light. c is the expression for the speed of light. This is 3 x 108meters per second. And, if you've got something where the escape velocity is greater than the speed of light, that's what a black hole is. And it makes a certain amount of sense. If the escape velocity's greater than the speed of light, then light won't escape this object, so you won't be able to see it, right? Because, the way you see something is you see the photons that come off it.
And, there's nothing particularly extraordinary about this, as far as it goes. In fact, the middle of--this was already talked about and worked out in some detail in the middle of the eighteenth century by an otherwise obscure English clergyman named, I think, John Michell, and he did the following calculation. He said, okay now, if this is going to be true, how big is such an object? How dense does it have to be? And, you can work this out. Supposing the escape velocity is equal to the speed of light--so c = (2GM / R)½. You can square both sides and regroup, and you have R = 2GM / c2. This is now--wasn't called this in the eighteenth century, but it's now called the Schwarzschild radius. Schwarzschild was a contemporary of Einstein. And, this is the size something has to be in order for its escape velocity to be equal to the speed of light. And a black hole--another definition of a black hole is something in which the radius of the object is less than the Schwarzschild radius--because if the radius is less, then the escape velocity will be even greater.
So as I say, this was worked out in obscurity in the middle of the eighteenth century, and nobody thought anything much about it. Michell sort of pondered for a little bit what such an object would look like, and he decided it would look dark. And true enough, but who cares. And nobody thought anything further about it for 150 years until Einstein came along at the start of the twentieth century, and came up with the Theory of Relativity. And one of the pieces, important pieces of relativity is that the speed of light, c is a very, very special velocity, and has rather bizarre and extremely profound properties. And it was only at that point that the concept of the black hole was recognized as something that was in any way out of the ordinary. And so, for 150 years this idea kind of lay dormant until it was resurrected by a profound change in the thinking about the underlying physics.
So, this is one of these kinds of historical fables that we've hit a couple of times. This is the fable of Michell's discovery of black holes. And the moral of this little fable might be that the importance of a result changes depending on the context; result changes, sometimes dramatically, with context. So, something that looks quite unimportant for a long time can all of a sudden become a very big deal. And so, it happened in this case.
Okay, so, one question you can ask is that's all fine, how big is the Schwarzschild radius for some bunch of objects? Let's try the Sun; here, let me start a new piece of paper. So, how big is the Schwarzschild radius of the Sun? Schwarzschild radius, again, 2GM / c2 = 2 x 7 x 10-11. Mass of the Sun, now, 2 x 1030. Divided by c2. c is 3 x 108 and we'll square it. Okay, so let's see, 2 x 2 = 4, times 7 is 30.
30 x 1019
30 - 11 = 19
Divided by--3 x 3 = 10.
(108)2 = 1016. So, that's 3 x 103, because 19 - 16 = 3--oh, in meters, because we're still in MKS units, because that what we're using. That's the units of G that we've chosen.
3 x 103; that's 3 kilometers. That's pretty small for the Sun. And so, you might imagine that such objects are rare, or perhaps even non-existent, because it would have to be incredibly small, and therefore, incredibly dense, to have a strong enough gravitational field to prevent light from escaping. And so, you might have thought that this is an entirely theoretical concept, and that no matter how interesting it is, there's no point in really studying it further, because you're unlikely to ever encounter one of these things in real life.
But one of the strange things that was--has been known for quite some time is that black holes really should exist, and that they are predicted to exist. This has been known for quite a while--known for at 70 years, that black holes should exist. And the reason they should is that they are one of the possible end points of stellar evolution--the evolution of stars.
Chapter 4. Gravity and Pressure in the Evolution of Stars [00:18:50]
And so, now I want to summarize how stars evolve. I should say, this is the subject of whole courses. You can take Astro 350 and they will talk about this for the entire semester. You can take Astro 110 and then they'll talk about it for a month. But we're going to do it in about twenty minutes, save you time and effort, here.
So, a star's life is determined by the competition between two forces; so, star's lifetime and evolution is determined by two forces. One is gravity, which has the tendency to hold the star together. And now, the thing about gravity is, it ought to work. But stars have no solid surface. So, if you can imagine gravity pulling on an atom on the surface of the star, why shouldn't that atom just fall all the way down to the bottom of the star? Because there's no solid surface to prevent it from doing so. And the answer is that gravity isn't the only force operating, there's also pressure.
So, there's gravity, which pulls stuff in, and pressure, which has the tendency to push out. And these things balance in most stars. In the Sun, for example, these two forces are in balance at all points in the Sun, and this balance goes by the technical name hydrostatic equilibrium. Hydro, because it's a fluid, it's not a solid surface. Static--nothing's moving, and equilibrium is just balance.
And, to be a little more precise, the way this works--here's the surface of some star. Here's some point within the star, and there are two kinds of forces acting on this point. There's gravity, which is pulling the thing toward the center of the star, and then there's pressure forces in two different ways. The outer regions of the star exert a pressure inward. So, there's an inward pressure. And the inner regions of the star exert a pressure outward. And the outward pressure has to be greater than the inward pressure by exactly the right amount to counteract gravity.
So, it basically looks like Pout - Pin = gravity. And this holds true at all points. Now, in order--it's the other way around right? Thank you. Pin - Pout--yeah, right. Pin minus Pout has to equal gravity. And that requires that the pressure on the inside has to be bigger than the pressure on the outside, because you don't have negative gravity; at least, not until the third part of this course. But, at the moment, you don't have any negative gravity, and so the pressure on the inside has to be greater than the pressure on the outside.
Okay, so what is pressure? Cast your mind back to high school chemistry. Remember high school chemistry? It doesn't matter if you don't. I'll tell you everything you need to know. There's something called an ideal gas, and there's something that the ideal gas does, which is to exert gas pressure. Your high school chemistry teacher probably wrote down something that looks like this: PV = nRT. And here's the thing about this. V is volume in this case; P is the pressure;n is the number of particles per volume.
And so, the key thing here is that n divided by V is equal to the density, basically, times a constant. Because, remember, density is mass per volume. If you take the number of particles and you multiply by the mass of each particle, that'll give you the total amount of mass in a given region. You divide by the volume, that equals the density. And so, this also is a constant, this R thing. And so, what you get is P is equal to a constant, times the density, times the temperature. So, this is how physicists think of the ideal gas law, because we prefer to work in terms of the density.
Okay, so here's the pressure. And the pressure on the inside had better be bigger than the pressure on the outside, or this isn't going to balance, which means, either the density or the temperature, or both, had better be larger in the middle of the star than it is in the outer parts of the star. So, inside of the star, the T and/or the has to be bigger than it is on the outside.
Now, it turns out that if you just keep the temperature constant all the way through the star, you never achieve this balance. So, if only the density varies, then inner regions do have higher pressure but the increase in density also increases the force of gravity, because gravity is dependent on how much mass there is. And, if you increase the density, you also increase the amount of mass. So, you have higher pressure, but you also have higher gravity. And it turns out that you can prove, mathematically speaking, that no balance is possible, because it always ends up being the case, for gas pressure, that the amount you have to increase the density by, if you're only increasing the density, will also increase the gravity, and you'll never get a balance.
So, the consequence of that is that the inner parts of a star must be hotter than the outer parts. Otherwise, the star wouldn't exist; it would collapse. And this is true. The inside of the Sun turns out to be something like 107 degrees. The surface of the Sun turns out to be something like 6 x 103. So yes, indeed, the inside very much hotter than the Sun, that is very much hotter than the outside, in the Sun, and that's what keeps the Sun in balance.
And there's a problem with this. And the problem is that there is something called thermodynamics. And one of the laws of thermodynamics is that heat tends to flow from places where it's hot to places where it's cool. This is evident in everyday life. If you take a little piece of, I don't know, molten lead or something, and you drop it in a bucket of water, the heat from the lead will spread into the water. The water will increase in temperature very slightly. The heat will come out of that piece of lead. The lead will solidify, and everything will come into a kind of temperature balance. Similarly, if you put a snowball in some hot place, it'll melt. Why? Because the heat from around it will go into the snowball. The temperatures will try and equalize each other and they'll--it'll come out even. So, this law of thermodynamics is why the snowball has no chance in hell.
And so, this happens in stars too, right? So, the heat in the center of the star flows out. And when it gets to the surface, it's radiated. At the surface, it radiates, and that's the energy that we see coming from the star. It's this heat that was in the center. It's gotten to the surface. It's now radiating away out into the cold depths of space, and that's what we see.
But, that means that the temperature in the center of the star, which is holding the star up, decreases, and then the star wouldn't hold itself up. So you require--in order for the star to hold itself out--an energy source at the center of the star. And this does two things. It replaces all that lost heat, and it preserves the equilibrium of the star so it doesn't collapse.
Chapter 5. From Electron Degeneracy Pressure[cd] to the Chandrasekhar Limit[ce] [00:28:06]
Okay, so this is all pretty abstract. And it was known that this had to be true before they figured out what the energy source was. It was known for people just sort of thinking in very general terms about how the Sun could exist--understood that there had to be some kind of large source of energy down in the middle of the star. And, notice it has to be in the middle of the star. It does no good for the energy to be created all the way through the star, because if it's created all the way through the star, then the temperature is distributed throughout the star and you don't get a situation where it's much hotter in the middle than it is on the outside.
So, everybody knew for quite a while that there was energy being created in the center of the star. They just didn't understand how that was done. And then when people invented nuclear physics in the 1930s and '40s and '50s, it was understood that this comes from nuclear reactions--nuclear fusion, in particular. In the case of the Sun, it's the fusion of hydrogen, atoms together to make helium, that does this. And that releases energy in the same way that a nuclear bomb does.
The problem with this is that eventually you run out of hydrogen, or whatever your nuclear fuel [cf]is, because you've got only a limited amount of it in any one star. So, eventually, the nuclear fuel runs out. And then the star has many adventures before it settles down. And for these, I will have to refer you either to a textbook or to some other course, because I'm not going to take you through the whole exciting life of a star once its nuclear fuel is exhausted. Suffice it to say that you know in advance what the outcome has to be, because there's no way it can hold itself up, in the long run, because it doesn't have an energy source down at the center of the star. So, the consequence of this has to be that the star collapses.
Now, it doesn't necessarily collapse all the way down to being a black hole, because there are other kinds of pressure besides the pressure exerted by an ideal gas. So, at very high densities, you get other kinds of pressure. In particular, there's something called "electron degeneracy pressure." This is sometimes called Fermi pressure, after the guy who thought it up.
Degeneracy is another one of those words that means something different to physicists than they do to ordinary, normal people. I remember the first time I taught Astro 110, right after I came here, about fifteen years ago. I started talking in the middle of a class about degenerate white dwarfs. And you could feel this sort of wave of something between confusion and anxiety permeate through the class, and I had no idea what was going on. Some teaching assistant had to pull me aside afterward and remind me that these words mean different things. So, I apologize if this sounds like a sort of adult version of a Grimm's fairy tale, you know, with degenerate white dwarfs wandering around and stuff, but such are the words we have to work with.
Okay. So you have this electron degeneracy pressure--that's a different kind of pressure ‒ and that can stabilize the star. So it stabilizes a star--stabilizes the star at--around the radius of the Earth. So, that's very high density material. We can calculate the density. You'll remember our equation for density: mass over volume. And so let's see, how does this work? This will be the mass of the Sun, let's say, divided by the volume of the Earth. That's 4⁄3 πr3. Radius of the Earth is (7 x 106)3. So, let's see, (2 x 1030) / 4. 73--
72 = 57, cubed is 350. Times 1018. That's 6 x 3--yeah, okay, we're doing all right. And let's say that that's 2,000 x 1027over, I don't know, 1,400 x 1018. Let's cancel those.
109 kilograms per meters squared. That's about a million times denser than water. Water, you'll remember, is 103kilograms per meters squared. And water is defined to have a density of 1 gram for a cubic centimeter. So, if you were to pick up one gram of this white dwarf--one cubic centimeter of this white dwarf, it would be a million times more massive than a gram. That's about a ton. So, a thimbleful of this stuff weighs about a ton, very dense. And the Sun will end its life as a white dwarf with this electron pressure balancing the gravity. These--such stars are called white dwarfs, and there are many of them known. White dwarfs--this is the end point of the Sun.
And then, in the 1930s, what happened to make black holes inevitable, was that one of the great theoretical astrophysicists of the twentieth century, a man named Subramanyan Chandrasekhar, discovered that electron degeneracy pressure doesn't always do the job. So, in the 1930s, Chandrasekhar discovers--proves that if the mass of an object is greater than 1.4 times the mass of the Sun, electron--this kind of electron pressure is insufficient. And the star continues to collapse.
Now, Chandra was a graduate student in England at the time he figured this out, and he presented this rather dramatic result at a big meeting of the Royal Astronomical Society in London. And then, every graduate student's worst nightmare took place. Chandra's thesis advisor was a very famous man named Arthur Eddington, one of the great physicists of the early twentieth century. And after Chandra had presented his results to all these assembled scientific dignitaries, Eddington got up and denounced his own student, and said, "This can't possibly be true." And Eddington made the famous remark, "There ought to be a law of nature to prevent stars from behaving in this foolish manner."
And the consequence of that is that a lot of people didn't follow up on Chandra's idea. Chandra got miffed, as you might understand. He got on the boat to the United States. He spent the rest of his career at the University of Chicago. On the boat, he wrote a great textbook still in use on the structure of stars, in which he laid out in detail all of the arguments that the Chandrasekhar limit must actually exist. And fifty years later he got the Nobel Prize for it. But that--there was this kind of time lag there, and it is, I think, important for those of us, say, on the faculty to recall that if Eddington had listened to his student instead of to his intuition, the study of black holes would probably be forty years more advanced than it is. So, another fable for our times.
Chandra was always very gracious about this, actually. He would praise Eddington to the skies as a wonderful advisor, and then with this little asterisk. So, fable: Chandrasekhar's limit is the title, and the moral here is, "believe your student, not your intuition."
And actually, the story of Eddington was actually kind of interesting. As Eddington got older, he became more and more convinced that, you know, he could guess the right answer. And so, it wasn't just the Chandrasekhar limit, it was other things. He got a little weird toward the end of his life, and he started believing his intuition. Einstein did this too, right? Einstein famously discovers all this great stuff, and then the second half of his life is completely useless, scientifically, because he becomes convinced that his gut is telling him that quantum mechanics is wrong. This famous remark, "God does not play dice with the universe"--but it turns out, that isn't true. And so, there is this probabilistic nature of reality that quantum mechanics shows. And so, Einstein spent the second half of life trying to prove that his intuition was correct, that quantum mechanics couldn't really be true and thus, did no physics worth doing for about thirty or forty years. So, you have to watch out for this. If you're too smart and start believing yourself, you can get into trouble.
Chapter 6. Neutron Stars[cg] [00:37:59]
All right. Now, having said all that, Eddington was partly right. There is, sort of, a law of nature that prevents stars from behaving in this foolish manner. So, to understand that, what happens when white dwarfs--when the white dwarf collapses? It's got to get rid of its electrons, because the problem is, the way this electron degeneracy pressure works--you can't squeeze electrons any closer together than they are in a white dwarf. So now, you have to get rid of electrons. And so what do you do? You combine the electrons and the protons and you turn them into neutrons plus neutrinos. These are neutrinos. They stream out. And so, you end up with something that's made entirely out of neutrons. So, the whole star turns into neutrons.
A chemist would think of this as essentially turning the whole star into one atom, into one atomic nucleus. An atomic nucleus with no--an atom with no protons, no electrons, and 1057 neutrons. And you could imagine putting that somewhere on the Periodic Table.
Astronomers call these things neutron stars, and they exist. They were discovered in the 1960s. And a typical neutron star, a couple times the mass of the Sun has--mass equals 2 times the mass of the Sun. Radius of about 10 kilometers. And you can work out the density for that. Density is a billion times greater--I'll leave this as an exercise--greater than for white dwarfs. So, instead of a cubic centimeter of the stuff weighing a ton, it now weighs a billion tons. And you're having a tough time moving it around.
But 10 kilometers ‒ that's getting close to the Schwarzschild radius. Remember, we calculated the Schwarzschild radius of the Sun. It was about 3 kilometers. And, in fact, if you calculate the Schwarzschild radius of a star in terms of the Schwarzschild radius of the Sun--let's see, you get 2GM / c2, where M is the mass of the star, divided by 2G mass of the Sun, over c2. So the Gs and the cs all cancel, here. And you get Mstar / Msun.
So, if the Chandrasekhar mass of the Sun is equal to 3 kilometers, as we calculated, the Schwarzschild radius of a star with--whose mass happens to equal 3 times the mass of the Sun, is going to be 3 x three kilometers, or 10 kilometers. That's equal to the radius of a neutron star. So, a neutron star with mass greater than 3 times the mass of the Sun has a radius less than its Schwarzschild radius. And that's a black hole. Remember?
And the key thing here is that there are lots of stars with mass more than 3 times the mass of the Sun. We don't see them as black holes because they're still in hydrostatic equilibrium. But eventually, they're going to run out of nuclear fuel, and they're going to collapse. Now, in fact, during the course of the star's life, one of the things I glossed over is stars tend to lose mass as they live. And so, they don't end up with the same mass they started with. But stars with initial masses, at the beginning of their lifetime, greater than--I don't know, something like thirty times the mass of the Sun, will end up with masses greater than three times to the mass of the Sun. And then, there's nothing to stop their collapse. What happens is, they turn into neutron stars, but they turn into neutron stars whose Schwarzschild radius--whose radii are smaller than their Schwarzschild radius, and that is a black hole. So, they collapse down into black holes.
Chapter 7. Conclusion [00:42:38]
And so, you expect a large number of black holes to actually exist. This is what happens to massive stars at the end of their life. And so, we expect there to be--that there are many black holes. And so, the question we'll be exploring in the rest of this segment of the class is, how can you find these things? What are the properties of these things from a theoretical point of view? What does Einstein's Theory of Relativity suggest that these things are going to behave like? And then, the big question is, once you've found some, and you have a theory for what they behave like--then you can ask the question, does the actual behavior of these objects conform to the theoretical expectations? Another way of saying that is, was Einstein right? Is general relativity the correct theory to describe these very exotic objects? And so, that's what we'll be talking about in the rest of this section of the course. Now, let me turn back to the previous section of the course, which was--which culminated last time in this little test. And I think we're ready to hand these back. Is that true?
[end of transcript]
ASTR 160 - Lecture 9 - Special and General Relativity
Chapter 1. Event Horizon [ch][00:00:00]
Professor Charles Bailyn: Okay, let's start--let's see, we started talking about black holes last time, and there's now going to be a problem set that is going to be available later today, due next week. And I should also point that I've put together this website on black holes. Actually, some of the help sheets already send you to that website. And I'll put a link on the classes server as a whole, but here it is as an actual URL, cmi.yale.edu/bh for black holes. And that website kind of serves as a sort of online textbook for this part of the course. And so, you have something written down to look at for this whole section of the course. And, as you'll see, many of the things we'll be talking about are actually discussed on that website, as well. So, you can find out more information there.
Okay, so I--last time, I defined a black hole. This is simply something where the escape velocity is faster than the speed of light. Or, alternatively, and this is--amounts to the exact same thing, the radius of the object is less than the Schwarzschild radius, which is defined for an object of any given mass. And this isn't particularly extraordinary or interesting, as long as the speed of light isn't particularly extraordinary or interesting. And one of the things that happens when you start talking about relativity is that it turns out the speed of light is a very important quantity. So this--these are interesting because the speed of light is interesting.
And, we'll talk in a minute about how all this arises, but one of the interesting things about the speed of light is that you can't go any faster. It's the speed limit, and no physical process can make you go faster than the speed of light. So, c is fastest velocity possible. And the consequence of that is, supposing you have one of these black hole things--so, here's some object, and it's got some radius. And its radius and its mass are such that the escape velocity, here, is greater than the speed of light. You could imagine that around it is a kind of imaginary sphere. Let's put it in dots. And this is the sphere where the escape velocity is equal to the speed of light. And you remember what the formula for the escape velocity--Vesc is equal to 2GM / R, the square root of 2GM / R.
And so, if on the surface of this object, the escape velocity is greater than that of light, if you keep moving out, R will keep getting bigger. And so, eventually you'll come to a point in space where the escape velocity is equal to the speed of light, and this is called the event horizon. And the reason it's called that is because, if nothing can go faster than the speed of light, what it means is that any event that takes place inside this imaginary sphere can't radiate any information about what's going on to the outside, because this--the escape velocity's greater than the speed of light. Light can't escape, and because nothing else can go faster than the speed of light, nothing else can escape. And so, no information of any kind can come--comes from inside the event horizon to the outside.
And so, in a certain philosophical sense, this event horizon sort of constitutes an edge of the Universe, because nothing that happens inside can affect what happens outside in any way. You can't see in. You can't detect anything that goes on inside. No event inside this event horizon can tell us what's--about itself or--and we--there's no--in principle, there's no way we can find out anything about what happens inside an event horizon.
It turns out that this rather grandiose statement, that the event horizon constitutes an edge of the Universe, has a mathematical meaning as well. The great physicist Stephen Hawking--you may have heard about him. He's the guy in the wheelchair. His --shorthand--his--one of his great discoveries was to demonstrate that the mathematics of the event horizon is actually very similar to the mathematics of another edge of the Universe--namely The Big Bang, which is the start of the Universe in time. And so, it turns out that this statement that this constitutes an edge of the Universe is not just a philosophical statement having to do with defining the Universe as something we might eventually, possibly, know something about, or be influenced by, but also has a mathematical meaning, as well.
And so, the way you have to think about the Universe is as a kind of Swiss cheese. There are holes in it. There are holes in it, which aren't part of our Universe, where these little event horizons cut pieces out. And it's this kind of thing that gives black holes the kind of extraordinary aura of mystery that they sort of have in everyday life.
Various strange things happen inside the event horizon. And now I better pause, because I just contradicted myself, right? Because I said a minute ago that you can't find out anything about what happens in the event horizon, and now I'm about to tell you what happens inside an event horizon. Okay, so it--we're ten--we're eight minutes into class and already I'm contradicting myself. And so, let me explain exactly what I mean by this. Here's what you do if you want to make statements about what's going on the inside of one of these things.
What you do is you take the equations that apply outside the event horizon. You assume that the same equations are going to apply inside the event horizon. Turns out, the mathematics of these things, and I'll show you an example of this next week, the mathematics of these things do very bizarre things at the event horizon. But mathematicians are smart people. One can cope with these kinds of problems. It tends--you tend to have problems like, everything gets divided by zero right at the event horizon. But, as you may recall, if you've done a good pre-calculus course, there are ways you can get past those kinds of infinities--but everything goes haywire.
But, if you make the assumption that the same set of equations apply inside the event horizon as outside, you can then manipulate those equations, interpret the results as if the symbols mean the same thing inside as they do outside, and then make statements about what happens inside the event horizon.
And this looks a lot like physics, right? Because you've got a bunch of equations and, you know, some of them stand for time, and some of them stand for space, and energy, and all this good stuff. And you can do manipulations of those equations, and then you can make statements about what happens. But, it looks like physics--you can make an argument that it isn't actually physics, because you're making an assumption that those equations apply inside there, and that's an assumption that is un-testable. Even in principle, un-testable, because you can't ever get any information about what's going on in there to see if those really are the right equations. And so, here's something where it looks like physics but, depending on what you define the limits of physics to be--and this is kind of a deep philosophical question that we won't go too far into--it might actually be something that, while interesting, it is really something else.
So, just a couple of examples of the kinds of things that you can deduce from the mathematics about what goes on inside event horizons. One--here's something. All matter with R less than the Schwarzschild radius--oh, this distance, here, will always be the Schwarzschild radius, by definition, because that's the radius away from an object where the escape velocity is equal to the speed of light. So, all matter inside the Schwarzschild radius collapses to a single point in a finite amount of time; so, it doesn't take forever to do this. And that points--since it's got a lot of matter but no volume, that's what a point is--that's a point of infinite density. And this is sometimes called a singularity.
And you can see some of the problems with doing mathematics inside event horizons. If you try and calculate the density for this--density is mass over volume. If you've got a bunch of mass in a single point, the volume is zero, and you've just divided by zero, and you're in all kinds of trouble.
So it--everything collapses down to a point of infinite density. There's no force strong enough to stop this from happening. You can't set up a rocket system to keep yourself in orbit or keep yourself from falling down. Partly that--one way of understanding that is that the energy you would exert in trying to hold yourself up has a mass equivalent. You'll recall that E = mc2, so for a given amount of energy there's a mass equivalent. The extra mass just pulls you down more. So you can't--by expending energy, you can't hold yourself up inside a singularity, so everything collapses.
It's also true--this is the kind of thing you see in popular accounts of black holes. The statement is sometimes made: the properties of space and time are reversed. That's a weird thing to say. What could this possibly mean? Well, let's see. It's related actually to what I just said, that everything falls down to a singularity. In an ordinary situation, we can move around in space. I can expend energy and move all around in space. I can move back and forth. I could jump up and down, see--but you don't have a lot of choice of where you go in time. You move forward in time at the rate of one day per day, right? And you can expend a lot of energy trying to avoid that, and it won't actually do you any good.
Chapter 2. Singularity and Clarifications on Black Holes [00:11:47]
So, inside an event horizon you fall down to a singularity. And, as I said, you can expend a lot of energy but it doesn't change your trajectory in space. So, what happens when you fire off your rocket? Well, in principle, providing you believe in all these equations, you could, in principle, move around in time. And, this is why the science fiction writers like black holes so much, because it's a kind of scientifically-certified time machine. You go into the event horizon. You turn on your energy pack and move all around in time. And then, what they forget to tell you is that you're inside an event horizon, so it does you no good, because you can't come out again.
And so, then, the effort is to try and figure a way that you could have this nice effect of the time machine without having an event horizon. And, in particular, there's some interest in whether one can have what's been described as a naked singularity. A naked singularity is a singularity with no event horizon around it, so that you could get in down to where all the weird physics happens, and then come back out again.
Hawking proposed what he called the Cosmic Censorship Theorem. That is the statement that naked singularities are not allowed. And so, hence, censorship can't have naked singularities. And there is, to this day, some dispute over whether that will turn out to be true, in general, or not.
And you can go on in this vein. You can talk--you can talk on and on about the extraordinary physical events and properties that these things might actually have. And what you have to keep in mind, as you're doing this, is that there's a limit to how much this could ever, even in principle, be realized in real life. You know, you fall into one of these wormholes that they like to have on the science fiction--in the science fiction stories, and you'd better have some very tricky physics if you're going to be able to come back out again. And that's not something that the science fiction world typically dwells on.
Although, it is interesting--you know the movie Contact? So, this is based on Carl Sagan's novel of the same name. And, one of the things that happens late in this--this is the first use, I think, in science fiction, of the concept of a worm hole, where you fall into a black hole and you fall out again somewhere totally different in space and time. And there's an interesting story about this--that what happened, supposedly, was that Sagan, when he was writing his novel, got to the point in the novel and he needed something to happen for plot reasons, in order to move the plot forward. And he--Sagan himself was not an expert in relativity, so he called up one of his friends, who was a guy named Kip Thorne, one of the most famous general relativity people. He said, look, here's what has to happen in my novel. Give me some science jargon so that--that will make this work. And Thorne, who was a very smart guy, thought about this for a while, and came up with this concept of the wormhole that, you know, you fall into a black hole here and you fall out of it again on the other side.
Then, Thorne went away and thought about this for a while. At least, this is what he claims in his book, and said, you know, this might work. And a whole series of scientific papers flowed from that. So, here is a place where art pushed science. Art in the form of science fiction, if you consider that art, pushes science--pushes science forward, rather than the other way around--quite unusual, in that case.
All right, so, all of this is great. But I want to focus a little bit on what does it actually mean? These grand statements that one makes about, you can't go faster than the speed of light, space and time are reversed, and so forth. What actually underlies those statements? And to what extent are these sort of spectacular kinds of phenomena actually realized in the real world? So, I'm an observational astronomer. What right do I even have to talk about black holes, the number one characteristic of which is that you can't see them at all? So, that's where we're going to go in a minute, and to do that, we have to talk about relativity--special relativity[ci] and general relativity--because those are the theories that underlie all of this. So, before we go plunging into that let me pause for questions at this point. Yes?
Student: [Inaudible]
Professor Charles Bailyn: Yes, you should be. Yes, so the--a little confused about why space and time are reversed. Let me not answer that now, because there's, there's math next week, which will make that a little bit clearer. I think it is a legitimate question, not just to ask why are space and time reversed, but what that even could mean. And we'll get back to that in a little while. Let me--yes, go ahead.
Student: [Inaudible]
Professor Charles Bailyn: Right, and doesn't--so, supposing you have, for example, a neutron star that's a little bit smaller than its event horizon, why wouldn't it just stay there inside its event horizon, rather than collapsing down? And again, this is a calculation that I don't think I can demonstrate for you, but it comes about because the energy, the pressure forces that would have to hold it up, actually also contribute to the mass of the thing. And if you then compute the balance, the hydrostatic equilibrium that we were talking about last time, it never works. It can't work, because the amount of energy required to hold it up is so great that the mass equivalent is going to generate additional gravitational forces. And if this were a different kind of course, I'd do the calculation, but let's not go there. Yes?
Student: Time originally goes forward, right?
Professor Charles Bailyn: Yeah, I would say. No, no that's fine--yeah.
Student: It can go backward?
Professor Charles Bailyn: Well, the thing is, in our normal situation, we have no choice about where we go in time. And the statement that I made, which I didn't back up in any way to--that a rational person would really want to believe me--but let me make this statement again. Inside the event horizon, you can move around in time. You don't necessarily have to go forward. And that is the thing--that is the piece of the picture that the science fiction writers tend to hone in on.
And so, you know, the statement is made about relativity. And I'll make this explicit in a little while. Time is the fourth dimension. There are three space dimensions, one time dimension, and you can do all sorts of calculations that way. But it's perfectly clear, just from everyday life, that the time dimension is not the same as the space dimensions, because we don't have the opportunity to move around in them.
So, it must be true that in a certain sense, time--the time dimension, if you want to call it that, of the space-time continuum, must somehow behave differently from the spatial components. And they do, and I'll show you why in a little while. And that behavior is reversed between space and time inside the event horizon. Things that are positive terms in the equation become negative, and vice versa. And as I say, we'll actually--I'll actually write some of this down. Yeah?
Student: Since, like, nothing could escape--can escape from a black hole, is one of, like, the possible, you know, scenarios for the end of the Universe, be--if --all matter being in the form of black holes?
Professor Charles Bailyn: All--okay, so since nothing can escape from a black hole, is that a possible end of the Universe? Yes. One of the potential ways the Universe could evolve--the Universe is expanding right now. Again, this is now in the third part of the course, we'll talk about this. The Universe is expanding, but it's got a lot of matter in it. So, in principle, it could stop expanding and collapse. You could ask the question, "Does the Universe expand faster than its own escape velocity, or not?" And this is a question that cannot only be asked, but answered. It could expand, slow down, stop, fall back together again. And, if that happened at a certain point when it fell together, the whole Universe would be inside its event horizon.
Now, how that would affect those of us who are inside is a little less clear. Eventually, you'd get crushed, right? But--because nothing would be able to stop the inexorable collapse down to a singularity at that point. But yeah, that is a potential end of the Universe, is-- we all end up inside a big event horizon. We all collapse down to a singularity in the middle.
It turns out, that isn't what's going to happen--at least, not from current observations. The current observation is that the Universe is expanding faster than its own escape velocity. So, you have the opposite ending point where it just keeps getting bigger and bigger, and more and more diffuse and sparse, and cold and boring, and the Universe ends that way. But again, that's part three of the course. We'll get there. Yes?
Student: [Inaudible]
Professor Charles Bailyn: Where does all the mass go when it collapses? The mass is still there. The mass is still there. And this is actually a very important point, because things can still be in orbit around a black hole and not fall in. Because, when you're far enough away, when you're outside the event horizon, it just behaves like any other mass. Black holes can move through space. They can orbit around other things. Things can orbit around them.
If the Sun turned into a black hole right now, well, we would freeze. But aside from that, the orbit of the Earth--if the Sun turned into a black hole of the same mass as the Earth, the orbit of the Earth wouldn't change, because we're far enough away that it just seems like any other mass down there. So, a solar mass black hole could have a planet in exactly the same orbit as the Earth is around the Sun.
This is one of the differences between how black holes actually behave and the metaphorical use of black holes. You know, this is one of those words that gets used in common culture for various things, and it usually carries a connotation of a kind of great sucking thing that pulls everything in, inexorably. That's true inside the event horizon, which is where this idea arises from. But, if you're outside the event horizon, you can just keep going around in circles around it, in exactly the same way that you can be in orbit around any other kind of mass.
Student: [Inaudible]
Professor Charles Bailyn: Why is there no volume? Ah, okay. So, why is there no volume with this stuff at the center? If there's nothing to--think about what we were talking about, hydrostatic equilibrium, the other day. If there's nothing to stop the collapse, every--if there's no energy or pressure force sufficient to stop the collapse, everything has to end up in the same place. It all falls to the center. And, you can calculate how long that will take. And after that happens, all the mass is down at the center. What does it mean to be the center? It's the central point.
Now, in fact, there's got to be--this is how it works in relativity. Relativity does not incorporate quantum mechanics. Quantum mechanics does funny things when things get small. And so, it is likely that there are physical effects that we don't understand at the quantum level before you get to precisely the same point--but we don't know what they are, because that would require a theory that encompasses special--general relativity and quantum mechanics at the same time. And until the string theorists finish their work, we don't have such a theory. So, probably something happens to prevent a pure point, but we don't know what it is. And so, from the point of view on the outside, you just imagine everything falling down toward a central point, and kind of landing there in some way. But it is a mystery. Yes?
Student: [Inaudible]
Professor Charles Bailyn: Is the Universe finite? Yes. It's got to--in fact, you know it has to be finite, because the sky is dark at night. Let me explain that. If the Universe were infinite and had stars distributed at random throughout the Universe, then any direction you looked at, you'd eventually see the surface of a star. You could do this in a calculus kind of way by integrating over the total light of the Universe. And so, it can't be infinite in extent, and filled with stars--the same as stars like the Sun, or any kind of star, really, that is distributed evenly.
So, one of several things must be the case. Either the Universe is inhomogeneous--that is to say, we live in a very special place where there are stars--after a while there are no stars anymore. Or, it has to be finite in extent. It only goes out a certain distance and stops. Or, it has to be finite in time. That is to say, it began a certain number of years ago, and didn't exist before that. That helps you, because then you only--if it's--if the Universe is 13 billion years old, you only see things that are within 13 billion light years, because the light hasn't had a chance to travel.
It turns out that it's pro--the easiest way to understand this is, it's the latter. The Universe had a beginning. And this is the whole idea of The Big Bang--that it started as some kind of very small object, and then expanded at some finite and indeed calculable time ago. The Universe is now thought to be, I think it's 13.7, plus or minus 0.4 billion years old. And so, the finiteness of the Universe is--at the moment, is--the primary reason it's finite is that it's finite in time, not so much that it's finite in space. But, it has to be limited in some way, or you'd see an infinite amount of starlight.
Student: [Inaudible]
Professor Charles Bailyn: Excellent. If the Universe is finite, what's outside the Universe? That is exactly the right question. I can't answer that, because--although I will try in section three of the course. We'll learn much more about this stuff. I can't answer that because, you know, what is the Universe? The Universe is what we can study, scientifically. And so, the very first question that a sensible person has about The Big Bang and the finite Universe is what's outside it. And that's actually not a science question, because it's intrinsically unanswerable by scientific means.
Now, there are things you can say about it, just as there are things you can say about the inside of an event horizon. And you can base them on scientific ideas and scientific thinking, and you can say these nice things about space and time. And one could say similar things about what's outside the Universe and, you know, how it might have come to be and so forth. But you've done a little epistemological shift when you start talking about those kinds of things, because you're no longer talking about things that, even in principle, can be verified by observation or experiment.
So, I do have some things to say about that. I'll say it in the third part of the course when we talk about the Universe. But you should think about what I have to say about that in a different way from what you--from what you think about what I have to say about how planets orbit around the Sun. We'll come back to this later. Yes, go ahead.
Chapter 3. Locating Black Holes [00:27:46]
Student: I was just curious about the black holes. How do they find them?
Professor Charles Bailyn: How do they find them? That's the next three weeks of the course. That--and, in fact, that is subject of my research. This is what I do for a living. I find black holes, and I'll tell you how it's done. We can see if we can find another one over the next few weeks or so. Yes?
Student: [Inaudible]
Professor Charles Bailyn: Ah, is it possible that we are inside an event horizon and we don't know it? Yes, in that--again, this relates to the question that was asked over here. Could it be that the Universe is going to ultimately collapse and be inside a black hole? Supposing that happened. Supposing we were in the collapsing phase of the Universe, gradually, over many billions of years, falling down to some singularity; we would not necessarily know that.
Now, if you approach a black hole that is of the size of a star, or even the size of a galaxy--when you got close, you'd feel it. And the way you'd feel it is, is if you're falling in, your feet would be closer to the center than your head. And the gravitational force on your feet would be stronger than that on your head, and you'd stretch. And so, if we were really near to a black hole of a size of objects we understand, then we'd know that, because the tidal force is on our bodies would mean that we couldn't keep ourselves together. But, you could imagine a sufficiently big black hole, kind of encompassing the whole Universe, that wouldn't affect us in that way. So, it's not inconceivable. Yeah?
Student: [Inaudible]
Professor Charles Bailyn: Yeah, so the word "reverse" in this "reverse space and time"--how about this: I agree that might--that wording might not be--I've seen this wording used, which is why I used it. But I agree that it might not be the best wording one could use. How about, the properties of space and the properties of time are interchanged with each other? That's--then it doesn't have this kind of directional thing. It's about how these things behave. Yeah?
Student: Do we get--does the Earth get any heat from other stars than the Sun?
Professor Charles Bailyn: Yes. Well, of course, we do. If you look out in the sky, you see stars. We see the radiation from those stars. And so, of course, there's radiation in all forms, heat and otherwise. The fraction of the radiation that we get from sources other than the Sun is extremely small. The--
Student: [Inaudible]
Professor Charles Bailyn: No. No, because--and here's why: because, the second most prominent source of heat that we have is actually geothermal heat from the center of the Earth. And that's vastly more than the sum of all contributions by stars. And it's vastly less than what we get from the--from our own Sun. And so, you know, radioactivity and the latent heat in the core of the Earth, that's, by far, more than anything that comes to us from the stars. But, we certainly do get energy radiation from the stars. If we didn't, astronomers would be out of business, because this is how we--this is how we study them, by looking at the radiation. Yeah?
Student: Okay, so let's say that you're inside the event horizon of a black hole and--as I remember, the circular velocity of any object is less than the escape velocity?
Professor Charles Bailyn: Uh-huh.
Student: So couldn't you theoretically orbit the black hole inside the event horizon after the circular velocity?
Professor Charles Bailyn: Ah, excellent question. Could you orbit--could you get yourself into a stable orbit inside an event horizon? If everything were in--worked the way Newtonian mechanics says it works, you could. But, it turns out, there are relativistic corrections. There is something called the smallest circular--smallest--the Innermost Circular Stable Orbit. IC--ISCO, Innermost Stable Circular Orbit. That's important, because that actually can be observed in various ways, and we'll talk about this in two weeks' time. The Innermost Stable Circular Orbit turns out to be outside the event horizon.
But, you're right, if you were only using Newtonian calculations, there would be that square root of 2, and you could imagine being in a circular orbit inside the event horizon. But that's one of the things that is different about the relativistic calculation. It turns out that for non-rotating black holes the Innermost Stable Circular Orbit is three times the Schwarzschild radius. Yes?
Student: [Inaudible]
Professor Charles Bailyn: Ah, yes. So, is there a potential for a black hole to accumulate an infinite amount of mass, which is the sort of vacuum cleaner scenario? First of all, there isn't an infinite amount of mass in the Universe, necessarily. The Universe is finite. Second of all, even if there was, if there was a huge black hole here, and something else outside the event horizon that's moving faster than the escape velocity of this thing, at that point, then it doesn't fall in. So, it's not necessarily true that it will pile up an infinite amount of mass. In fact, black holes--black holes ought not to have infinite mass. They ought to have a particular amount of mass. They'll gain more as stuff falls, but if stuff doesn't fall in, if it's moving faster than the escape velocity, then they won't accumulate it.
Student: [Inaudible]
Professor Charles Bailyn: Well it depends what you have--we observed extremely massive holes. It depends what you mean by "extremely massive." The mass--most massive black holes that we know anything about are about three billion times the mass of the Sun. So, that's pretty massive, but it's about the same as an ordinary galaxy.
And we--what we don't have evidence for is black holes that are substantially more massive than whole galaxies of stars. We don't--there's no evidence for that. So they're, basically--just to jump ahead, they're basically two kinds of black holes that we have empirical evidence for. One are black holes the--about ten times the mass of the Sun. So, masses of individual stars. Then there are the so-called supermassive black holes[cj], which are the masses of whole galaxies, and those are the kinds of black holes for which we have direct evidence at the moment. Yes?
Student: [Inaudible]
Professor Charles Bailyn: Okay, so, is it possible to detect the presence of a black hole by looking at things around it? Yes. That's exactly what is done, and we'll--I'll describe this in the next couple of weeks. But, it doesn't happen the way you suggest. It's not like something suddenly disappears, so we know it fell into the event horizon. What you do is you see these things in stable orbits around--that are perfectly happy going around in circles, around the black hole. For example, you can see binary stars, double stars, in which there's a black hole and something else. And these things are in nice stable orbits, and you infer the properties of one object by looking at the motion of the other object. That's exactly what we did for the planets. And so, you can do that again for black holes.
Student: [Inaudible]
Professor Charles Bailyn: If you actually saw something disappearing? Yeah, and in fact there is--there is indirect evidence that there's material falling through--that in some systems there is material currently falling through the event horizon of black holes. And, in fact, that's one of the things that is a current topic of active research, is, can you demonstrate that?
If there were a black hole in our own Solar System, anywhere near us, we'd know it. And the reason we'd know it is, that's a lot of mass. It would disrupt the orbits of the planets. And as long as the planets--and so, we have a kind of early warning system. If a black hole cruises by, Pluto's orbit gets disturbed first. And so, all of those nice objects out there in the Kuiper Belt, their orbits would go all haywire if something as massive as a stellar mass black hole [ck]were accidentally to come nearby, in exactly the same way they would be as if an ordinary star of the same mass were to come by. You wouldn't be able to see it, but the orbits of everything would be changed rather drastically. So, the odds of us actually falling into a black hole are extremely small, and if it were to happen, we'd get a great deal of advance notice. So, not to worry.
There are astronomical things you maybe should worry about, asteroids crashing into the Earth, this isn't one of them. Actually, Bethany Cobb and I were on a TV show that explored this particular possibility. This is a wonderful thing. It happened last summer, where ABC News decided to have a two-hour special on all the different ways the Earth could be destroyed. And they called us up, and we went down to New York. It was very entertaining, and you know--but, I was too much of a scientist. I kept saying it isn't going to happen. You shouldn't worry about it. You know, you should worry about the asteroids and global warming, and all this kind of stuff. Don't be worrying about black holes coming rolling in. And, of course, the consequence of that is that I didn't get a lot of screen time. And the guys from the American Museum of Natural History, who were better at popularizing science than I am, got all the screen time. So, you know, I know better now. We'll speak in better sound bites next time around. Yeah, that was fun. But we should screen it, you know, or at least the first part.
Other questions? All will become clear in due time. Actually, that's not true. But some things will become clear in real time. Gosh, this was great, excellent. All sorts of questions.
Chapter 4. Introduction to Special and General Relativity [00:37:51]
So now, let me at least start talking about special relativity. There are two kinds of relativity. There's special relativity--and special relativity, which was devised in 1905 by Einstein--this is essentially a set of laws of motion. So, it's the same thing as Newton's Laws of Motion, only it's a more elaborate version of it. So it substitutes, if you will, for Newton's Laws of Motion, and in fact, incorporates Newton's Laws of Motion.
Then there's general relativity, discovered about ten years later, again by Einstein. And this is the equivalent of a law of gravity. You'll remember that the way one has to calculate orbits in the Newtonian Theory is, you take Newton's Law of Gravity and you plug it into Newton's Laws of Motion. So, this is a change, or an enhancement, in the laws of motion. This is a change or an enhancement in the law of gravity.
In both of these cases ‒ and this is important to realize ‒ it doesn't overturn what Newton did. This is a misconception about how scientific revolutions work. This is as revolutionary a set of ideas as you could possibly imagine. And yet, Newton's laws are--still hold. They don't overturn them. What they do is, they say, Newton's laws are not general laws, but laws that only operate in certain specific situations. These are now the general laws that operate always, and Newton's calculations are a subset of these things that only work under certain conditions.
And just to jump ahead a little bit--the condition is, there's a quantity--so, now I'm going to talk, first, about special relativity. We'll leave gravity until later. But now, let's just talk about how things move. And this is important, because this gives rise to the limit on--to the limit on velocity. All velocities must be left less than or equal to the speed of light. You can't go faster than the speed of light.
And just to jump ahead, the way Newton's Laws of Motion relate to special relativity is through a parameter, a quantity called gamma [γ]. And this is equal to this quantity.
1 - V2 / c2, the square root of that, in the denominator. Okay.
1 / (1 - V2 / c2)½
And when V is much, much less than the speed of light, then gamma is equal to 1. You can see. If this--if V is much less than the speed of light, this quantity is more or less zero. You got 1 / 1. Gamma = 1.
Newtonian physics assumes that gamma is equal to 1. So, this leads directly to all of Newtonian physics. But, as velocities start to get higher, gamma starts to be different from 1. And if--as V approaches the speed of light, what's going to happen? This is going--if V is the speed of light, V2 / c2 = 1. You've got 1 - 1 in the denominator, so you've got zero in the denominator. So, as V approaches the speed of light, gamma approaches infinity. And then you get--so, you start to get these relativistic effects.
So, it turns out, for example, in relativistic physics, that mass isn't exactly what Newton thought mass was. Mass is what's called the rest mass; this is the Newtonian mass--times gamma. So, if everything's moving slowly, and gamma = 1, then the mass is exactly what Newton thought it was going to be. It's a property of objects. It's constant. It doesn't change. Mass is conserved and you can do all the wonderful calculations that you can do in Newtonian gravity.
Now, the properties of gamma are such--remember this goes to infinity--that, therefore, as the velocity goes to the speed of light, the mass approaches infinity, because gamma approaches infinity. And you're multiplying the Newtonian mass by some number that's getting larger and larger and larger and larger as you get closer to the speed of light.
Now, what does this mean? Remember Newton's Laws of Motion. Let's go all the way back to Newton. This is--force is equal to mass times acceleration. Yeah, go ahead.
Student: What does gamma stand for?
Professor Charles Bailyn: Gamma is a parameter that tells you how relativistic you are. It is defined by this. So, it's a function of your velocity. Yeah. And whether--and how--how much bigger than 1 it is tells you how far away from the Newtonian Theory relativity is. And, the faster you go--the closer you get to the speed of light, the more relativistic you become and the less Newtonian you are. So, it's a parameter that tells you how close you are to Newton. Other questions, yes?
Student: How exactly is gamma derived? [inaudible]
Professor Charles Bailyn: How was gamma derived? I'll talk about the history of this next time, but basically it was--Einstein revised the Laws of Motion in response to some experiments, which weren't giving the right Newtonian answer. That's the short version, and we'll do the long version next time. And, it was the genius of Einstein that he recognized how it--how the Laws of Motion should be modified, and indeed that they should be modified at all, which was not most other people's initial reaction to these experiments.
Okay, so now, what happens if your mass becomes infinite? Right? That means for a--remember this is acceleration, and this is force. If your mass becomes infinite then F / M, which is equal to the acceleration, this goes to zero, which means you cannot have any acceleration, no matter how much force you apply.
And that's why you can't go faster than the speed of light. Right? Because as you get closer and closer to the speed of light, this gamma factor becomes larger and larger. That makes your mass larger and larger. And then, to get a given amount of acceleration, since this is huge, you have to have an increasing amount of force. By the time you get to the speed of light the mass is--sorry, it's this whole thing that's zero, not the mass. By the time you get to the speed of light, you need an infinite amount of force to accelerate yourself. So, you need an infinite amount of force in order to go faster. And so, by the time you get out to the speed of light, you can't go faster, because it would take an infinite amount of force to do so. Yes?
Student: Does that mean that when you're traveling the speed of light, not only can you not speed up, but you also can't slow down, since it would take force to slow you down?
Professor Charles Bailyn: That's right, and what it really means, though, is that nothing with a non-zero mass can actually ever get to the speed of light. And therefore, what about light? Light has zero mass. It has to, otherwise it can't go at the speed of light. So if Mzero is zero, then this whole thing applies in a very different way. And so anything that goes at the speed of light has to be massless, for just this kind of reason. Yeah?
Student: If light is energy then doesn't it have a mass equivalent?
Professor Charles Bailyn: It has a mass equivalent, but its rest mass is zero. So, the reason it has energy is because you've got zero times infinity. And so, if you slow light down, then it disappears altogether. Right? Because--if you slow light in a vacuum down, I should specify, it disappears altogether, because if this isn't infinite and this is zero, then you've got no mass energy at all. Yes?
Student: If you can't accelerate or decelerate, how do you get to your sort of intrinsic velocity?
Professor Charles Bailyn: Well, what is an intrinsic velocity? This is where relativity becomes relative. Depends on how fast the person who's observing you is going. But remember, this only applies if you're already moving at the speed of light. If you're not moving at the speed of light, then this isn't infinite. You have some finite mass and you can change your velocity. Remember, acceleration is a change in velocity by applying force. And as long as the mass isn't infinite, it just--you know, you calculate how much force it takes. And that's how much it takes to change your velocity.
Other questions? Excellent questions all around. This is not at all straightforward and we will continue next time.
[end of transcript]
ASTR 160 - Lecture 10 - Tests of Relativity
Chapter 1. Velocity and Mass in Special Relativity [00:00:00]
Professor Charles Bailyn: Okay. The subject is special relativity. And right at the end of last class, I had written down this factor, γ. And γ is the key thing, which tells you how relativistic you are. γ = 1 over the square root of [1 - (V2 / c2)]. And we talked about this factor a little bit. If V over c is equal to zero or approaches zero, then γ, obviously, is 1. And when γ is 1, that's the Newtonian case--then, everything is just like Newton's law said.
Okay. On the other hand, as V over c goes to 1--that is to say, as the velocity approaches the speed of light, this γ factor goes to infinity, because 1 minus 1 in the denominator--that's zero in the denominator, so the thing has to go to infinity. And then, all these bizarre relativistic effects start taking place. And the one we talked about in particular came about from an example of how this γ is used--namely, that the relativistic mass is equal to γ times the rest mass, which is the Newtonian mass. And, obviously, if γ = 1, then the Newtonian mass is equal to the--then, the mass is equal to the Newtonian mass, and you're in Newton's laws, and everything is fine. When the velocity approaches the speed of light, then this total relativistic mass goes to infinity--the consequence of which is that you can no longer accelerate, regardless of how much--so, no more acceleration--regardless of how much force is applied, because force equals mass times acceleration. And if the mass is infinite, then any amount of force will not give you an acceleration. An acceleration is a change in velocity, and so, the consequence of this is that you can't go faster than the speed of light. It's also another side consequence of this--sorry--there was? Oh, excellent, yes ask it.
Student: [Inaudible.]
Professor Charles Bailyn: V--okay. V is the velocity that something is traveling. There's no escape velocity here, at the moment. There are all kinds of different Vs floating around, so it's important to keep them straight. Yeah, can't--you can't go faster than the speed of light.
A side comment from this is that photons, particles of light, which obviously, by definition, do go at the speed of light, have to have zero rest mass--because otherwise they'd have--they'd end up having infinite mass and infinite energy which isn't--which isn't physical. So, photons which go at the speed of light, for which γ is therefore infinite, have to haveM--this little M0 here, equal to zero. So, you have zero times infinity, and that can equal a finite number, otherwise they'd have infinite energy. Yes?
Student: I was just wondering if we're talking about velocity as a factor or, like, the speed of light?
Professor Charles Bailyn: At the moment what I'm talking about is velocity as a speed. So, I'm talking about the magnitude of the velocity. And you can tell, actually, that that's the case, because it comes in as the velocity squared. So, even if it's a vector, when you square it, that gives you a scalar quantity.
Okay. So, let me go on from here and talk about an intermediate case. We've talked about V equals zero, we've talked about V equals c. Let me talk about an intermediate case. And the particular intermediate case--and this will show up on your problem set ‒ this is the thing we didn't get to on Thursday. This is what's called the post-Newtonian approximation. This is when you're just a tiny little bit relativistic. So, V over c, or more properly, V2 / c2 is small, but not zero.
And here, a little mathematical concept that may have flashed before your eyes when you were in eleventh grade, or something, comes in, which is the series expansion. We won't do the mathematics of this, but here it is. If you take 1 plus epsilon [ε]--and I should say, epsilon is a--used by mathematicians to mean something small. Famous mathematician named Erdos used to refer to children as "epsilons." That seems to be carrying it a little bit too far. But, this is how mathematicians think. So, epsilon, in this case, is something that's much, much less than 1.
And if you take 1 plus epsilon--so that's a number that's slightly greater than 1--and you take it to the nth power, you can then expand this as a series. And the series goes like this: 1 + n ε, plus a bunch of other terms, each of which is multiplied by a higher power of epsilon. So, there's a term in ε2 and there's a term in ε3, and so forth. And this is an infinite series.
But the thing is, if epsilon's small, then ε2 is even smaller. So, if epsilon's already small and nε is pretty small, then ε2 is far smaller than that, ε3 yet smaller, and these are negligible. And so, the approximation is, (1 + ε)n is approximately equal to 1 + n ε, if epsilon is much, much less than 1.
So, here's what we're going to do. We're going to use this series expansion, and we're going to generate expressions for some things--in particular, the mass, but some other things, too--where the 1 is the Newtonian term. And the thing represented by this n ε, which is much smaller, is a correction to the Newtonian term, and is the first sign that things are becoming relativistic. So this is, in this context, going to be a Newtonian term, and this is the post-Newtonian approximation. Okay.
Oh, so, let's just do an example. Let's think about the motion of the Earth--the Earth's orbit around the Sun. Earth's orbit, you may recall, from the last section of the class, how fast the Earth moves. It's about 3 x 104 meters per second. Thirty kilometers a second. The speed of light is 3 x 108 meters per second. And so, V2 / c2 = [(3 x 104) / (3 x 108)]2 = 10-8. And so, that quantity, which is going to turn out to be the post-Newtonian effect, is one part in 108 for the Earth's orbit. And so, pretty small. Considering that we think that 9 = 10, something in the eighth decimal place isn't going to do a lot of damage. So, it's not a particularly relativistic situation.
Chapter 2. Gamma and Post-newtonian Mass [00:08:34]
All right, so, now I want to go back and I want--that's just an aside. I want to go back and apply this approximation to &γ;. γ is equal to 1 / (1 - V2 / c2), the whole thing to the ½ power. That's (1 - V2 / c2)-½. I got to get a better pen, sorry about that. And now, this can be expanded. This can be expanded in just this kind of way. The first term is 1. Epsilon is - V2 / c2.
n is - ½. Minus times a minus is a positive, so this is plus ½ V2 / c2--plus additional terms, the first of which is (V2 / c2) 2, which in the case of the Earth would be 1016. So, it would be vastly smaller still, so, we ignore that. And so that--and so, you can substitute this for γ in situations where V is kind of small. For example, let's go back to this mass equation. 1 + ½V2 / c2. This is the total mass. Now--oh, let's separate these terms out. M0 --that's the Newtonian term. And now, here's a post-Newtonian approximation.
½ M0 V2 divided by c2. Okay, high school physics experts, do you recognize this term? Kinetic energy. Absolutely right. This is from high school physics. The kinetic energy--that is to say the energy in the motion of this object. So what is this whole term? This whole term is the kinetic energy. So, M is equal to the Newtonian rest mass, plus the kinetic energy divided by c2.
Now, you'll recall that E / c2 = M. So, this is the mass equivalent of the kinetic energy. So, given this nice relativistic idea that mass and energy are interchangeable, well, here it is. Here is the kinetic energy expressed in terms of mass. And so, this little equation M = M0 γ has a variety of consequences. When V / c--V2 / C2, really, goes to zero, then it's just Newton. It just says, mass equals mass, because γ is equal to 1. And that expresses an important Newtonian concept, that the mass of something is an intrinsic property of that object, which doesn't change--which is how things are in Newton, but not how things are relativistically.
In the other extreme, where V2 / c2 approaches 1, this equation expresses the fact that light--the speed of light is a speed limit. And in the post-Newtonian case where V2 / c2 is small, but not zero, this same expression expresses the fact that E= mc2.
So, all three of these concepts come out of the same equation. It's this kind of thing that makes physicists say things like, the theory of relativity is incredibly beautiful. It's hard to know--I realize, it's hard to know what that means, you know. What makes a piece of mathematics beautiful? It's when you get a situation like this, where a simple mathematical concept sort of spawns all kinds of new and unexpected ideas, depending on how you look at it--and that they all kind of come together as one.
I have this vivid memory in graduate school, I was sitting in a class, you know, and the professor was doing the thing that professors do. He was writing down all kinds of miscellaneous information really, really fast, from relativity theory and nuclear physics. All sorts of stuff was going up on the board. I was doing the thing that students do, where you desperately try and write it all down, so that you can then go back and figure out what the hell he was talking about later. And suddenly, in the midst of this rather typical class, I realized what was happening: that in about twenty minutes, he was going to put all this stuff together and prove Chandrasekhar's limit. We talked about Chandrasekhar's limit a week or so ago. That's the limit whereby a white dwarf can't be bigger then 1.4 times the mass of the Sun or it continues to collapse. And, I suddenly saw where all this was going and I sort of wrote down in my notebook, "Chandra," and underlined it, put my pencil down. And then, I just watched for twenty minutes. It was great. It was--the only thing I can compare it to is listening to a great piece of music, because it kind of unfolds in time, and you see where it's going, and it's just a great feeling.
So, don't be condescending to the physics majors when they're working like hell on those problem sets late on a Thursday night, because they have access to realms of aesthetic experience that you can only imagine.
But perhaps--it's true, it's true, I promise. But you have to work hard to get there and ask questions. So, at this point, let's do the question thing. Here's what I'd like to do: talk to the people around you. Introduce yourself to the people around you--groups of two, three or four will do fine. And come up, in consultation with your neighbors, with a question to ask. Now, this could either be a question of something that you guys don't understand about what I've said, or something where the question, if answered, would deepen your understanding beyond what I've said. So, take a couple minutes. Talk to your neighbors. Make a friend. Think of a question, and in a couple minutes' time, we'll regroup and I'll answer some of the questions. If your particular question doesn't end up being answered, you know, hand it in at the end, so that I know what you were thinking of--and so, definitely write them down. And we'll try this out. Let's see how this goes. So, introduce yourself to your neighbors and come up with a question. And when you have it, put your hand up and ask it. We'll come around and ask.
Chapter 3. What Is Mass? [00:15:34]
All right. I've now heard the same question twice, so let me answer it, and then we'll ask for other things. The same question, which has been asked in a couple of different ways, is, what is mass? That's an excellent question, because it's awfully hard to parse what's going on with this M0 and this other kind of M, and stuff, if you don't know what the concept means. So, that's a really good question.
What's mass? Mass is defined--you can think of it this way. What is mass? Mass is defined as from this equation, in a certain sense. F = ma. It tells you, for a given object, how hard it is to move--or, more precisely, how hard it is to accelerate. So, higher mass requires greater force to accelerate by a certain amount. It's a property of an object, and it tells you how much it resists being pushed around. It's sometimes referred to as "inertial mass" for this reason. It's an expression of the object's inertia--how much it resists being accelerated.
And so, in Newtonian physics, this is purely a property of the object itself. You can say, if you've got a basketball, or if you've got a car, or something, that the car has more mass than the basketball. Why? Because if I go--do I have a basketball? I don't. All right, car, a car has--the lectern has more mass than the little piece of cardboard here, because if I apply force to the cardboard I can move it. And if I apply the same amount of force to the lectern, I move it a whole lot less. And so, what is the difference between those two things since the force applied is the same? The difference is that this one has a whole lot more mass.
And in Newtonian physics, the mass is a property of the object. In Einsteinian physics, there is something that's the property of the object--that's its rest mass. But the inertial mass, the amount by which it resists being pushed, is also a property--not just of the rest mass, but also of its motion. So, if this were moving at a large fraction of the speed of light and I applied some kind of force to it, it wouldn't move nearly as much as it does--or, it wouldn't change its motion nearly as much as it does when it's standing still. And so mass--the inertial mass of the thing varies depending on how fast it's moving. So, that's an important question for understanding this. Let's see--yes?
Student: Let's say that you're on Earth. If you were to push an object that's standing still versus an object in motion, you're going to have the same affect on it?
Professor Charles Bailyn: No, you're not going to have the same effect on it, because if the object in motion is going to have a little extra piece to its mass.
Student: Okay, so it has a very small effect [inaudible]
Professor Charles Bailyn: A very, very small effect. In fact, if you try this on the Earth itself, which is moving at 30 kilometers a second, that effect is going to be 1 part in 108.
So, that's what we calculated before, where we--where was it? Yeah, here it is. That's this purple part here. You calculateV2 / c2, that's 10-8. So, it's a difference if something moving even as fast as 30 kilometers a second, which is pretty fast--this difference is only going to be--actually, ½ of 1 part in 108. So, it's a hard thing to see. Now, the place you can see this stuff is in particle accelerators, because there, you can take sub-atomic particles and accelerate them to very close to the speed of light. And then you see these very dramatic effects. Yes?
Student: So, if something's going at the speed of light, so that the force you would need to stop it is infinite [inaudible]?
Professor Charles Bailyn: Yes, yes, that's correct. You cannot stop something that's going at the speed of light, because the force you'd need to accelerate it, which could either be a--making it faster or slower, would be infinite. But, that's why photons don't have any rest mass at all. That statement that you made only applies to something which has non-zero--greater than zero rest mass.
Student: And they never go?
Professor Charles Bailyn: And they never go to the speed of light, because you can't get them that fast. You'd need an infinite amount of force to get it to go that fast. Photons are a different story. And, of course, if you stop a photon, it disappears. Because if it's going less than the speed of light, then it's got no energy, because it's a finite γ times zero rest mass. Yes?
Student: What about all the weird, like, time stuff you always hear about?
Professor Charles Bailyn: The weird time stuff you always hear about. Excellent. Yeah, okay. A couple of other Lorentz transformations[cl]. Time is equal to γ times time zero. This is time dilation. The faster you go, the slower your clock works. This is the origin of all that nice science fiction, where you get on a rocket ship. You go close to the speed of light. You go somewhere. You turn around. You come back. Your clocks are running slow, so, it only takes a year in your time. And you come back and everybody--you know, a hundred years have passed. All your friends are dead, and so forth. So, that's a whole science fiction thing.
There's also length contraction. That looks like this. Take the pen. Put it in motion. Make that motion at some substantial fraction, at the speed of light, and it gets shorter. Amazing. We'll talk more about this in a little while.
Yeah, these are--these things with the γs in them, they're collectively known as the Lorentz transformations. That's just a name. And these are the ways in which basic properties--space, time, mass--change with velocity. Yeah?
Student: So with the equation, M = M0 times γ. M0 is the intrinsic mass?
Professor Charles Bailyn: Yes. No, no, no, M0--yes. Let me think. M0 is the intrinsic mass. M is the inertial mass.
Student: Okay.
Professor Charles Bailyn: That's a way of thinking about it.
Student: So, if something was traveling at a very small speed, wouldn't it mean that V2 / c2 was close to zero?
Professor Charles Bailyn: Yes.
Student: Which means the inertial mass would be close to zero?
Professor Charles Bailyn: No. If it goes--so, you were right up to the very end. Remember how this works.
γ = 1 / [(1 - V2 / c2)½]
If V / c goes to zero, γ goes to 1. And in that case, the inertial mass is equal to the intrinsic mass. And, if it's going faster, then the inertial mass is bigger than the intrinsic mass. The intrinsic mass is usually referred to as the rest mass.
Student: Well, then how did you get V2 / c2?
Professor Charles Bailyn: Ah. That's the second term of the series expansion.
1 / [(1 - V2 / c2)½] expands to be 1 + ½ V2 / c2 plus other terms. Here's the first term. That's the rest mass, because we're going to multiply this by M. And this is then the kinetic energy divided by c2.
Student: So the [inaudible]
Professor Charles Bailyn: It's the second term.
Student: [inaudible] inertial mass can never be zero. It'll just go closer to the front?
Professor Charles Bailyn: Yeah, the rest mass doesn't change. If V2 / c2 goes to zero, what happens is, the kinetic energy goes to zero, which is exactly what you want it to do. Yes?
Student: How does--how is momentum conserved when something's relativistic?
Professor Charles Bailyn: How is momentum conserved when something's relativistic? Excellent. There is an equation of relativistic momentum. And it's that thing that's conserved, which is different from M times V, because V behaves differently and M behaves differently. And you can work out exactly where all the γs go in that, and I don't remember it off the top of my head. But there is a quantity that is conserved, but it doesn't look quite the same as the Newtonian quantity. In the limit where the velocity is small, it reduces down. The first term of that series is M times V. Yes sir?
Student: When you define mass by the equation force equals mass times the acceleration, how, then, do you define force?
Professor Charles Bailyn: Yeah, okay. So, this gets a little bit circular, right? Okay. Force--you can define it either way. Force is the thing that--force is the ability to do work. That's the technical definition. Force: ability to do work. And then, work also has a technical definition. The problem with these things is you kind of do--if you just define them all around the circle, they do tend to come back and bite themselves in the tail. I agree with that.
But force is also related to energy. How much energy is required to exert a certain force? So, all these things, interrelate--but it is definitely true that there's a circularity to the definitions, if you follow them all the way around. So, if you keep asking that kind of question, I'm going to go around until I get back where I started from. Yes?
Student: Why is the speed of light constant in all frames?
Professor Charles Bailyn: Why is the speed of light constant in all frames of reference? That's problem two of your problem set, and I'll come--I'll say a few things--that's an insufficient answer, but I'll come back and say a little bit more about that in a minute. Yes?
Chapter 4. Lorentz Transformations and Relativistic Effects [00:26:25]
Student: We were just a little bit confused with the original Lorentz transformation--how, in most cases, that transforms toE = mc2. Could you show that to us?
Professor Charles Bailyn: Yeah. So, let's go back and take another look at that. All right, so, here's what I'm going to do. First of all, I'm going to take γ--this quantity--and I'm going to expand it. This is equal to γ, and now I'm going to expand it. That gives me 1 + ½ V2 / c2. Let's see what have I done with the--my--the pieces of paper are getting out of order, here. Here it is.
So, inertial mass is equal to the rest mass, times γ. So, now, I'm going to substitute in this approximation for γ. And then, I'm going to multiply M0 through both terms. So this is--so, the inertial mass is equal to the Newtonian mass, plus a term that looks like this. One half M V squared is, in Newtonian terms, the kinetic energy. And it appears here, divided by c2. And so, a way you can write this is that the inertial mass is equal to the rest mass, plus the kinetic energy, divided by c2. And that is an example of the fact that energy divided by c2 is another way of expressing mass.
Student: Then, how is it not saying that energy over c2 equals--why is it not from the energy of c2, literally, algebraically, whether it be M minus M0 [inaudible]
Professor Charles Bailyn: Oh, which M are you talking about?
Student: Yes.
Professor Charles Bailyn: Yeah, its M0 here, and it's M over here. And so, somebody asked--actually you're now the second person who's asked this question, so I better answer it explicitly. I answered the question, "What is mass?"
What's energy? E = mc2 squared. So, what do I mean by this? M--this is the inertial mass. So, that's M, which is equal to, in this case, M0 plus kinetic energy over c2. And notice the difference here. This is one kind of energy. This is kinetic energy. That's the energy in--that's the energy contained in the motion.
Another way you could write this is the rest energy over c2. So E, here, is the total energy. And there are two kinds of energies being expressed here. There's a rest energy, divided by c2, and there's a kinetic energy, divided by c2. But in the Newtonian case, you think of them as two completely different things--whereas, in the relativistic case, they're two manifestations of the same thing, and they add to make the inertial mass. Yes?
Student: At what velocity are a fractions of c-- would something need to be traveling on Earth for us to--for there to be a perceptible relativistic effect?
Professor Charles Bailyn: Okay. So, how fast do you have to go to have a perceptible relativistic effect? That depends how good your instruments are. If you've got something that can perceive--that can measure a velocity or an energy or a mass to eight decimal places, then it doesn't have to go so fast. If you have something that's fairly crude, then it has to go much faster.
But I should say--special relativity, these Lorentz transformations, have been measured upside down and backwards in the laboratory. This work to many, many decimal places.
Here's an example. If you take sub-atomic particles that are unstable, that decay--they have a half life, so, half of them will decay in ten seconds, or something. And you take those particles, and you accelerate them to a large fraction of the speed of light. It takes much longer for them to decay, because they're going so fast and their time clocks slow down.
One manifestation of this is, there's a kind of unstable particle that's created at the top of the atmosphere. These things are called "muons." What happens is, cosmic rays come in. They blast the top of the atmosphere. They make these muon things. The muons propagate close to the speed of light, and they arrive at Earth. And you can measure, if you have a little muon detector--never mind what the heck a muon is--but imagine that you have something that could detect it on Earth, and you see a whole bunch of these things caused by cosmic rays. But, if you ask, how long did it take them to get from the top of the atmosphere down to where your muon detector is, it's much, much longer than their decay time. So, you really shouldn't see any of them at all. But you do see them. And the reason is because they're going at close to the speed of light. And so this is--these effects are observed and measured to great accuracy in the laboratory and in astrophysical situations. Yes?
Student: I know it's practically impossible, but what would happen here if we--if you were to go faster than the speed of light?
Professor Charles Bailyn: Faster than the speed of light? Well, you'd have super infinite mass. This would not be good. Well, okay. So, let us imagine what the equations would do. What would happen is, as you go faster than the speed of light, if you try and slow down toward the speed of light, you'd have the same problem. That is to say, it would take you more and more effort to slow down to close to the speed of light. And the consequence of this is that if you're faster than the speed of light, you can't slow down to the speed of light, or slower than that.
There are hypothetical particles--and this doesn't exist in the real world--but, there are hypothetical particles that do this. These are called tachyons. They have the odd effect that they go backwards in time--because again, if you believe the equations, right? Time dilation. T = &γ; T0. Now, look at γ. Square root of 1 - V2 / c2. So, this is awkward. If V is bigger than c, this is a square root of a negative number. That becomes imaginary. Right? Square root of a negative number--hard to do. So, this becomes imaginary. So, your time axis becomes imaginary, and all sorts of very bad things start to happen to you. Yeah, yes?
Student: So, as your mass increases with velocity, do you just--does the particle or the entity have a greater gravitational effect?
Professor Charles Bailyn: Does it have a greater gravitational effect? Excellent question. That's the next lecture, because that's general relativity. And what you're doing is you're assuming that Newtonian gravity is correct. Newtonian gravity--gravity is a force proportional to the mass.
Turns out--and this is one of the things that led Einstein to his theory of general relativity--turns out that relativistically, it's--that gravity should not be thought of as a force, at all. And there's a whole different way of thinking about it, and your question has to be, in a kind of Zen sense, unasked. We'll get to that. We will get to that. But the point is that, in relativistic theory, gravity is not a force, anymore. And so, the question doesn't arise in quite the same way. Yes?
Student: [Inaudible.]
Professor Charles Bailyn: Sorry?
Student: [Inaudible]
Professor Charles Bailyn: E = M0 / c2 + K.E. Yeah. You have to put--you have to get the c squareds in the right place, and that's basically a unit conversion.
Student: What's K.E. / c2?
Professor Charles Bailyn: No, E -
Student: Oh, E.
Professor Charles Bailyn: - is equal to c2 M0 + K.E. Basically, what I've done is I've multiplied this equation by c2 on both sides. Yeah. Yes?
Chapter 5. Time, Light, and the World [00:35:02]
Student: I don't know if this is really a worthwhile question, but, what is--what are the implications for, like, what time is?
Professor Charles Bailyn: Well, this is the--
Student: If you have one meaning of what time is?
Professor Charles Bailyn: Right. So, what are the implications for what time is? This is the big stumbling block, from a philosophical point of view, to all of this stuff.
Turns out, time isn't absolute. That is to say, one has the feeling, as we go through our everyday life, that, you know, my watch and your watch are kind of measuring more or less the same thing, to the extent that they're accurate to do so. So, if we have identical, perfectly accurate watches, and we go about our daily life and come back, they're going to read the same time at the end if they read the same time at the beginning--because time moves the same way for me as it does for you. This turns out to be false.
And so, time is not an absolute quantity. Neither is space, for that matter, because length changes also. This is quite disturbing. And the reason it's so disturbing to us is our brains have evolved in a situation where we're always moving really, really slowly compared to the speed of light. And therefore, you don't have to worry about this stuff in everyday life, down to some factor of 10-12. But, nevertheless, it turns out to be true that time does not tick off in an absolute way. And this is why people get so freaked out by this stuff--because it seems counter to everyday experience. But, it can be measured. And it turns out to be true.
So, the Newtonian case, what we're used to and the way our brains work, turns out to be only an approximation of the way things really are. There are other things that are conserved, no matter how fast you go. And we can get to that at some point--but time isn't one of them. Yes?
Student: Why is the speed of light this magic number?
Professor Charles Bailyn: Why is the speed of light this magic number? Okay. So, the fact that there is a magic number comes out of this kind of equation. Because, when this quantity is equal to 1, bad things start to happen, and all the equations blow up. The fact that it is the speed of light that happens to be that, in that equation, is because light consists of particles with zero rest mass. And a particle at zero rest mass has to have this thing go to infinity or it doesn't exist at all.
Student: [Inaudible]
Professor Charles Bailyn: Why is the world this way?
Student: Well [inaudible]
Professor Charles Bailyn: That I--no, seriously, that's what you're asking, and it's a good question, and I can't answer it. You know, because this is where physics turns into--seriously, this is where physics turns into theology. You can't--all you can say from science is that this is the way it works. You can't answer the "why" question. You got to talk to my colleagues in some other department about that one. I'm sorry, because it's the question one would really like to know the answer to, right? But that one I can't cope with. Yes?
Student: Thinking about black holes, when the light enters the black hole across the event horizon, I've heard that it often times orbits or may orbit Jupiter? How is that possible if the light doesn't have mass?
Professor Charles Bailyn: Okay, so, the question is, can light go into orbit around a black hole? Basically. And the answer is, yes it can. And then, the next part of the question was, how does that work if it doesn't have any mass? You're asking the same question he did over there, because what keeps it in orbit is gravity. And if you reject the view that gravity is a force, then that question doesn't become important. And we'll--as I say, we'll talk about that later. So, that, again, is a question that pops up because you're thinking of gravity as a force.
Student: How does--with that equation, not to say "why," if it is, why it is, but where--how is it derived?
Professor Charles Bailyn: How is it derived? Okay. So, let me go on with the presentation in the last couple of minutes of the class, here. Here's--so, let me ask your question in a different way. Here's what--why did Einstein think this up? What a crazy-ass thing to do, right? Why not--there's little discrepancies when things are moving at the--at high speeds, but who the heck cares? It's hard to measure things at high speeds. Why not just stick with Newton, which has done very well for two-and-a-half centuries?
Here was the problem. In the late nineteenth century, there were a whole series of experiments, all of which, one way or another, had the same consequence--namely, that light--the speed of light is the same in all--for all observers. Okay? That's extraordinarily weird. It's not obvious immediately why that's so weird. But let me try and explain it.
Here's a guy, and let's say he's a baseball pitcher, and he's throwing a ball. So, here's the ball and it's moving this way at some velocity, which we'll call V1. And you're down here, or over here somewhere, it doesn't really matter. You're down here, and you've got a radar gun, and you measure the velocity of that baseball. How fast is it going? Well, if he throws it at V1, and you're at rest with respect to him, then you measure V1.
Now, supposing we put our pitcher on top of a moving train, all right? And the train is moving at some other velocity, V2. So, the guy's on top of the train. He throws it 100 miles an hour. The train's moving at 100 miles an hour. You're standing next to the track with your radar gun. How fast do you measure that baseball to move? Well, you measure a total velocity, which is the sum of the velocity of the baseball with respect to the train, and the train with respect to you. Okay? That seems pretty clear.
But now, supposing this guy--instead of throwing a baseball, he's got a flashlight. So he's got some light source, and the light is moving at the speed of light, because that's the speed that light moves. And you've got some device, down here, which measures how fast that light moves along. And he's standing at rest with you. And you measure the speed of light, and it comes out to be c--not surprisingly, the same speed of light.
Now, let's put the guy on the train. Here he is, moving at V2, or any V. You would expect that the speed of light that this guy measures down here would be c + V2. Right? Because, it would the speed of light with respect--from the flashlight, with respect to the train, plus the speed of the train, with respect to you. You would expect it to be c plus V2.
But it isn't. It's c. Vtotal = c, not c + V2. Very weird. The speed of light is the same no matter how fast you're moving relative to the source. You could be moving at 99% of the speed of light, toward a light source, and it would not be coming at you at 1.99 times the speed of light. It would be coming towards you at the speed of light. You could have a friend who's standing still, and you would both measure the same speed of that light, even though you're moving really fast compared to your friend. Very strange. And there are a whole series of experiments, the most famous of which is something called the Michelson-Morley experiment, which, one way or another demonstrated that this was the case.
What to do? And, what Einstein did was, he said, hmmm. Okay, various things were tried. The experiments were wrong. The equations were slightly screwy, who knows. But Einstein took--Einstein's great genius was to take this seriously, and to say, okay something is really screwed up with velocities. What is velocity? Velocity is space over time--miles per hour. Therefore--so, space and time are messed up when you get close to the speed of light. Now, of course, it also has to be true that when you're going slowly, the original Newtonian result is recovered.
So, this is your problem set. I have written down the relativistic formula for the addition of velocities. And your problem set is going to be to use that series expansion to demonstrate that in the Newtonian limits, you get this. And in the limit where one or the other of those velocities is the speed of light, you get this. So, you'll see. The algebra's actually not so bad. And that's what prompted Einstein to go on this whole rampage, generating all of these γs, and so forth. It was the experimental evidence that there's a serious problem with velocities. Okay, we got to stop. More next time.
[end of transcript]
ASTR 160 - Lecture 11 - Special and General Relativity (cont.)
Chapter 1. Lessons from Einstein's Discovery of Relativity [00:00:00]
Professor Charles Bailyn: We were talking about relativity. And where we ended up last time--we were talking about special relativity and all the weird things that happen to space and time. And the question arose, you know, what prompted Einstein to think these thoughts? And we talked a little bit about the fact that the speed of light is always the same no matter what the velocity of the person observing it and how that--then, if you take that literally, it tells you that space and time are weird, and are not constant and absolute the way you might think they are in a Newtonian sense, but vary according to the velocity of the observer and in these various ways having to do with that parameter gamma.
And so, Einstein's great stroke of genius was not to try and fix up these little problems with the experiment in some, sort of, patchwork kind of way, or to try and invoke a minor change in the laws of nature, but to recognize that this was a very big deal, and that would involve changing fundamentally how we think space and time work.
So, this is a very famous fable of science, you know. This is the thing where Einstein is a young man, and he's sort of a rebel. And he refuses to take his exam and he pisses off his professors. And the consequence is he doesn't get a good job. And he gets this job at the patent office right, in Bern, Switzerland, where he labors away in obscurity. And then, suddenly, in a blaze of glory in 1905, he publishes three papers, one of which is about relativity, one of which is the start of quantum mechanics, and the other of which proves that atoms exist. And so, these are three of the greatest papers of all time, published in a single year, by some clown who's a clerk in a patent office. All right. Very big deal. This happened in 1905, two years ago it was the hundredth anniversary of this. This was declared Einstein Year, and all sorts of fuss was made about it.
So, there are various morals that can be drawn from this. And I'm going to draw several of them in what you might call increasing order of sophistication. So, the low sophistication moral, moral number one, here, is, you know, about the genius in obscurity. A genius in obscurity can revolutionize science.
This is a very dangerous way to approach the Einstein story. Because it--you know, it's really easy to convince yourself that you are a genius in obscurity. Many people have convinced themselves that they are geniuses in obscurity. I know about this, because they send me email. And they explain to me in their email that they send me--and this happens to, you know, any scientist, particularly someone working in astrophysics or fundamental physics of some kind--they explain to me why Einstein was wrong. And indeed, why all science known to date is wrong, and they are right. And then, they say, you know, nobody believed Einstein either--as if that was somehow meant to make you believe them. They tend to write these things all in capital letters. There's a kind of pathology. When they used to write--when they used to do it on pencil and paper, they would write in such a way that you--they covered every inch of the paper. And, you know, they'd write something, then they'd write around the margins, back to the top. There's some psychological thing--I don't know what it is. But the legend of Einstein prompts a whole bunch of people to think that they too might be patent clerks. Yes?
Student: How do people find you?
Professor Charles Bailyn: Oh, well, look. You can look up the astronomy department website of Harvard, Yale and Princeton, and you'll find a whole bunch of people, I suppose. I also have published papers on black holes, and things that made their way into the media. I've actually had a fall-off on this, because I haven't been, you know, quoted opining about black holes in The New York Times recently. But ten years ago that--well I'll explain that in a couple weeks. There was an interesting thing that happened. In any case, you know, if you want to publicize your theory, what you do is you find a bunch of fairly prominent people in the field and you send them a big screen saying, you know, you will regret it if you do not appreciate my genius.
Student: Do you ever read it? Do you read them?
Professor Charles Bailyn: Sometimes I do. We have a little file in the library called the Crank File, in the Astronomy Department library. And from time to time, you know, we assign graduate students to figure out why they're wrong. We haven't done that lately.
Sometimes people amuse themselves by answering them. This can get you into various kinds of trouble. There was the gentleman with the theory of the Universe, which he illustrated in colored pencils, while he was serving his time at a medium security institution in Washington State. And we thought, you know, what a great way to--you know, much better way to be spending your time in prison than some other things you could think of. So, we sent him a bunch of textbooks and stuff. Then we started getting letters back, saying, after I finish my sentence, I'm coming to study with you, and explaining why he was innocent of the crime of which he had been committed. And so, at a certain point we started returning things, you know. No, terribly sorry, this individual has left Yale. We don't know where he is, whoever it was. This is Jerry Orosz who carried on this conversation for a while. And so, you have to be a little bit careful.
And then--oh there was the guy--This was amazing. There was a guy who showed up at the start of the semester. He's dressed in a suit and tie, carrying a briefcase, walks into the department office and says, "Where's my classroom? I'm supposed to teach cosmology." And he looked very respectable. The secretary thought, not with us, you're not, so sent him over to the Physics Department. He asked the same question of the Physics Department. He had just walked in off the street with a briefcase full of his textbook. And he was very annoyed that we hadn't assigned him a classroom and assigned students to come and learn, you know, his particular theory of cosmology. And in the end, he had to be escorted off the premises, and asked never to return.
So yeah, all kinds of patent clerks in the world, but most of them aren't Einstein. That's kind of the moral. And the reason you can tell--you asked whether I read these things. It's very easy to tell whether there's anything that you might be useful to read. Because what these people tend to say when they are not worth reading is, they tend to say that all previous science is wrong. I am revolutionizing things. Einstein is wrong, they say.
But Einstein didn't say that Newton was wrong. That wasn't what happened. That wasn't how a revolution works. You revolutionize science only if the new theory encompasses what was previously known--the previous theories. And this is this business of the parameter, gamma, where under appropriate circumstances, gamma is one. And under those circumstances, you reproduce the theory that was already in existence. And so, you know, there's been hundreds and hundreds of years of Newtonian physics, all of which is basically right, one way or another. So whatever your new idea is has to encompass all the things that were right about the old idea. And so, you don't overturn Newton. What you do is, you demonstrate that Newton's theory is only a part of a bigger theory. And then, the bigger theory is the new theory and it encompasses new kinds of data and explains new kinds of things, while simultaneously not overturning all the things that you know are right about the old theory.
And this is the thing that the people who wish they were Einstein, but aren't, don't understand. And so, anytime you see something where you're--where they're going to revolutionize all of science, it's certainly wrong. Because there's a large fraction of science in current existence that is correct. And you have to understand that. And you have to encompass it and go beyond that--but it's not going to get overturned. The planets aren't going to stop going in Keplerian orbits because somebody has a new idea. And so, it has to encompass the old idea.
Recently, in conjunction, in part with Einstein Year, two years ago, the historians of science have been rethinking what's going on with Einstein, and what happened in that patent office. And there's a new kind of idea that actually, it was--it wasn't that he was working in obscurity and some--and, you know, flipping burgers or something--that his work in the patent office was very important to the way he developed his theory. And that one of the reasons Einstein did what he did was he was working in a patent office and not in a university. Because, what was he doing in the patent office?
Well, it turns out that in the early part of the twentieth century, one of the big set of inventions that was coming through were ways of synchronizing clocks. It turn--because railroads had just been invented. And until then, you had had a situation where every city had its own time. Every city had a little observatory. They would figure out when the Sun was directly overhead. They would proclaim that to be noon. They'd fire off a whistle. Everyone would set all their clocks. But that meant--but they didn't have time zones. And that meant that every little town had a different time system. There was--Boston time was different from Hartford time, was different from New York time by 22.5 minutes, or whatever the appropriate amount would be. And that's all fine, if you move between these cities slowly. If you start running trains, you've got to have--the train system has to have a unified system of time, otherwise they run into each other. And there were crashes and terrible things.
And so, then, you have to have--okay. Then you have to have Boston and New York having the same time. So, how do you synchronize those clocks? Well, you've just invented the telegraph, so you send an--you send an electromagnetic signal at the speed of light from Boston to New York, and then back again, in order to synchronize your clocks. And there were various inventions that Einstein was reviewing in the patent office to accomplish this. And so, in his job, in his day job, he spent all his time thinking about clocks and time, and signals moving at the speed of light. So, perhaps it isn't surprising that he had deep insights into these kinds of things.
So, the current feeling among, at least, some historians of science, is that the patent office was, in fact, key to Einstein's thinking. So, he didn't come out of obscurity at all. He came out of the only place where the surroundings were such that you would have thought these thoughts. This is associated with a historian of science named Peter Galison, among others, who wrote a book called Einstein's Clocks and Poincare's Maps to try and demonstrate how the practical work these people were doing influenced their theoretical work. Yes?
Student: Was it triggered by one event?
Professor Charles Bailyn: Well no, he--was he triggered by one particular event? What prompted him to think about this was a whole series of experiments that had been carried out--all of which, as I mentioned last time, one way or another, demonstrated that this business that the speed of light was constant in all reference frames. And that there was no ether through which was the medium that was imagined to exist through which electromagnetic waves were supposed to pass. And there had been a series of experiments to try and detect slight changes in the speed of light when you put it on a rail--when you put it on a train, right? It's all about trains and elevators, which had just been invented. And--but it wasn't one particular triggering event. There was this whole range of things.
And Einstein, it should be said, was, by far, not the only person thinking about this. We call the transformations Lorentz transformations, because there was a guy named Lorentz who thought them up. Mathematicians like Poincare, physicists like Minkowski--there were a whole bunch of people thinking about this, and it was an urgent problem in physics. And so that had to be dealt with. And if Einstein hadn't existed, it might have taken a little longer, but we would have gotten special relativity in the end.
That's not necessarily true of general relativity, as I'll explain in a second. General relativity--if Einstein hadn't existed, general relativity might not have happened until the 1960s, because it was not prompted by a range of experimental results. The other bunch of experimental results that were prominent at the time were the atomic physics experiments that lead to quantum mechanics, which Einstein had a hand in, as well.
Chapter 2. General Relativity as a Theory on Gravity [00:13:27]
Okay, so, now let me move on to general relativity. That's a good moment to make this transition. So, general relativity, known as GR, for short, is now a theory of gravity. So, the part of Newtonian physics that is overthrown, or encompassed, as I was saying, by special relativity, are the Laws of Motion. Now, general relativity has the law--those same laws of motion, but also has embedded in it a theory of gravity, which is fundamentally different from the way Newton thought about gravity. So, Newtonian gravity is thought of as a force. It's a particular force. It's the force of gravity. There's a little equation, the force of gravity is equal to the gravitational constant, G, times the mass of one object, times the mass of the other object, divided by the distance between them squared.
And the odd thing--and this was sort of the starting point of Einstein's thought. The odd thing is these masses. And because--remember, somebody asked me last time, what is mass? And I gave you a whole thing about the inertial mass. How much it resists being pushed. And that comes about from F = ma. And so, the kind of mass that I defined last time is the inertial mass--how much it resists being pushed.
And so, conceptually--the mass that's in Newton's equations of gravity--conceptually, that's a different kind of mass. It doesn't have to be the same number. This is gravitational mass, because it's defined differently. It's defined not by how much an object resists being pushed by a force--any force, but by how much the object creates a particular kind of force. So, in this, it's how much it resists forces. In this, it's how much the force is created. And these are conceptually different things.
It turns out that to the best experimental evidence that you can muster, which by now is many, many decimal places, these two kinds of mass are exactly the same. This has an experimental consequence that was known already to Galileo in the seventeenth century. Look what happened. Supposing M1 is the Earth, and M2 is some object that you're dropping from a high tower. So, the story is, Galileo goes to the top of the Tower of Pisa. He drops a cannonball, or something, and watches it fall.
Then what happens? You substitute Fgravity into the equation of motion. And what do you get? So, you're using a particular kind of force. So, you get GM of the object, M of the Earth, divided by distance squared, where the distance is the distance between the centers of the objects--so, this is basically the distance to the center of the Earth--is equal to the mass of the object, times its acceleration.
And, look. If this mass is the same as that mass, they cancel. What does that mean? So, you can do this. It means the motion, the acceleration of the object, doesn't depend on its mass. The acceleration of the object will be the same for any object because, if it has greater inertia, it also generates, by exactly a proportional amount, a greater force. And so, everything falls from the tower at the same rate. And that's what Galileo did. He brought up a cannonball, and a wooden ball, and a whole bunch of other objects, dropped them, and discovered that the Greeks had been wrong. The Greeks imagined the heavier the thing is, the fast it falls. But the only reason you think that is because of dropping things like feathers, which do fall kind of slowly and erratically. That has nothing to do with gravity. That's air pressure, right? And so, if you drop things that are heavy enough so that air pressure isn't important, they fall at the same rate. So, that is the experiment that proves that gravitational mass is the same as inertial mass.
All other forces don't have this consequence. There is, for example--well, let me not draw on the corner here. I'll be just like the cranks. You know, I'll start drawing all the way around the edge of the thing, here. So, let us go on. Let's see. There is, for example, electrical force, which has a very similar kind of equation. That's a constant, times the charge of one object, times the charge of another object, divided by the distance between them squared. That looks almost identical to what the gravitational force looks like.
But, because the charge of an object isn't equal to its mass, different objects respond differently to--when put in--when an electric force is exerted on them. If you compare a proton, which is a mass of subatomic particle of charge one, with a positron, which is a low-mass particle of charge one. And you put the same amount of force on them, the positron will move much more, because it has so much less mass. And so, different objects respond in different ways to all forces except gravity.
So, the unusual thing about gravity--so, gravity is weird, because the gravitational mass turns out to be exactly equal, at least, to the best possible measurements, to the inertial mass. And there's no excuse within Newtonian theory to explain why that might be, and why all objects move--therefore, move the same when put in a gravitational field.
Okay, so, this bugged Einstein. This is the kind of thing that bothered him. And so, to explain this and other related, sort of conceptual issues, he promulgated a completely different theory--namely--so. Einstein says--okay.
So, gravity, Einstein says, is not a force. That's not the right way to think about it. And so, what--how does this work, then? All right, so point one. Objects move in a straight line, when they are not in a straight line, in the absence of a force. This is Newton's first law, or something. If you're moving at a constant velocity, you will continue moving in the same direction, at the same speed, unless something happens; like, a force is applied to you. If gravity isn't a force, that should still be true. Objects are moving in straight lines all the time, whether there's a gravita--whether there's gravity around or not.
That seems very odd, because we know perfectly well that things--that when you have a gravitational force, and you're in an orbit, you go around in a circle, not in a straight line at all. So, how does Einstein reconcile this with reality? And that's part two of the theory.
Chapter 3. Space-Time Curvature [00:21:30]
Part two of the theory is that the presence of mass--inertial mass, now--creates curvature in space-time, space and time. Now, how does that help? That helps because you have to then go back and think: what do you mean by going in a straight line if you're in a curved space? I'll give you some examples of this that you can see in a minute. What you mean by a straight line is the shortest distance between two points.
Now, we know from experience--or many of us know from experience--that on a curved spaced the shortest difference between two points is not exactly what you would expect it to be. Has anyone flown on an airplane from here to Asia, for example? Fly from New York to Beijing. So, let's make a map, a flat map. So, here's a flat space--north, east, west, south. Here's New York. Here's Beijing. And you might imagine, if things were flat, that the way you would get--and the quickest way that the airlines would save money, you know, because they don't--is that they would fly directly east. Because it's more or less at the same latitude, New York and Beijing.
But that isn't what happens. That isn't what happens at all. What you do, if you fly that route, or if you go the other way to Europe, wherever it is that you're going is, you fly this way. You go way up north. You look down halfway through, there's the Artic. Why do you do that? It's because the Earth isn't flat. The Earth is a sphere. And so, what it really looks like is this. Here's the Earth. Here's New York. Here's Beijing, and you fly this way, because that's the shortest distance across a--the surface of the sphere, between two points. I have a sphere somewhere.
Let's see, here's a sphere [holds up a basketball]. And this line here--think of this as the equator. And if you go from here to here, it would be the shortest distance between the two points--would be to go right across the equator. But we're not going on the equator. We're in the northern hemisphere. So now, I'm going to tip this upward so that these two things are both in the northern hemisphere. And now this line goes up and across. And if I tip it all the way up, so that you would be dealing with two cities on the opposite side of the world, as New York and Beijing, close enough, it goes--the closest line between them doesn't go around this way, it goes straight up over the top. So, if you project that onto a flat map, it looks like this. But in fact, on a sphere, on the surface of a sphere, that is the shortest distance between those two points. It's the exact same distance as it would be in the equator. You just tip the thing up, and it's clear that this is the long way around.
So, if you have a curved space and you're trying to get, in the shortest way, from one point to another, and you don't know you're on a curved space, you interpret it as a flat space, then you will interpret the path that you take as curved. And so, Einstein's statement is that the presence of mass doesn't exert a gravitational force. That's the wrong way to think about it. What it does is, it creates a curvature in the space-time. And so, then, objects traveling from one place to another move in straight lines, defined as the shortest distance between those two points. But if we're not taking the curvature into account, it looks like it's going around in circles. All right. Tough concept.
Chapter 4. Q&A on Special Relativity [00:25:45]
Professor Charles Bailyn: The sheet is supposed to represent space-time. Space-time is--and now, I've got to explain that, right? So, what is space time? Because it's space-time that's doing the curving. It's--you can think of it as a four-dimensional coordinate system, where the four dimensions are the three familiar spatial dimensions, X, Y, Z, and T for time. And you can understand where any given event, where an event is something that happens, can be identified with four numbers. It's spatial position--that's three numbers, and the time at which it occurs.
Now, in order to get these things into the same units, you have to actually represent this as the speed of light times time, because that--multiplying by the speed of light turns time units into space units, because this is miles per hour, or space per time. So, one year of time is the equivalent of one light-year of distance. That's how it converts. And so, one interesting thing--and, of course, the sheet, there, was a two-dimensional space, and only had X and Y that could identify any point on the sheet. So, the metaphor is to use two spatial dimensions to represent what is actually a four--conceptually, a four-dimensional space. That's why it's a metaphor and not something real. Yes?
Student: [Inaudible]
Professor Charles Bailyn: Yes, yes. Absolutely correct. Does gravity bend time, too? It has an effect on time similar to time dilation when you're going really fast. If you get really close to a black hole, your clocks will slow down. Yeah, yes?
Student: Why is that?
Professor Charles Bailyn: Why is that? Let me--next time, I'll write down the Schwarzschild metric[cm], and I'll try and answer that question. Let me go on, here, for a minute, and point out an important thing about this agreement, here, which is--that means the Earth, in its motion, for example, in one year--the time coordinate moves one light-year, which is 1016 meters. The space coordinate moves 2π times the semi-major axis, which is 1 Astronomical Unit. That's 2π times 1.5 times 1011 meters. That's something like 1012 meters.
So, the Earth moves 10,000 times further in time than it moves in space in a year. And that means that the Earth's motion in space-time is almost precisely a straight line, going straight forward in time. So, here's time. Here's, I don't know, the X-axis. And you could imagine that as time goes on, the Earth, you know, moves around the Sun. So its X-axis --so its X-coordinate goes back and back--back and forth. Here's the Sun, which, you know, wiggles a little bit, much less than the Earth, as we discussed.
But this picture, here, is inaccurate, because in fact this distance here, which is half a year, is 10,000 times longer than this distance here, which is half an orbit. And so--and so, in fact, the Earth's motion is represented by something that's almost exactly a straight line--so much so that I couldn't possibly draw the wiggle in a way that you could see it. So, here's the Earth going forward in time. And the wiggle is really small. That's not surprising, because the gravitational force of the Sun is small enough so that the Earth's orbit is correctly described by Newtonian physics.
And so, this is one of those situations where you have a Newtonian physics in relatively low gravitational fields. And as the gravitational fields get stronger, weird relativistic effects kick in. But that doesn't happen for the Earth. So there's--the number is this. Schwarzschild radius divided by distance, is the measure of how relativistic an orbit is. And if this number is small, then you get correct answers from the Newtonian theory. And we can work it out. The Schwarzschild radius of the Sun, 3 x 103 meters. The distance from the Earth to the Sun, 1.5 x 1011 meters. That's 2 x 10-8 and that's a small number. So, Earth works fine in a Newtonian sense. Yes?
Student: Is that R the radius of the orbit or the radius of the [inaudible]
Professor Charles Bailyn: That is the distance of the moving object from the center of the gravitating thing that's making the curvature happen. Yeah. So, yes is the answer. It's the radius of the orbit. Yes?
Student: Was the theory of general relativity a theory that was just promulgated, or does it actually have equations associated with it?
Professor Charles Bailyn: Oh yes. Does it have equations associated with it? You bet. You don't want to see them. There's a branch of mathematics called differential geometry, because--what happens is, this curvature stuff is all geometry. And the problem is that the further away you get from an object, the less the space is curved. So, the amount on the sphere, on the surface of the sphere--it's curved the same way everywhere. So, the equations that describe the curvature are the same at any point on a sphere. But you can imagine something that starts out with strong curvature and tails off. And then the amount of curvature at any given point is different from any other point. So, you have to describe it with a differential amount of curvature, and then integrate over the path that things take. This gets heinous, and we're not going to go there. But I will show you, next time, some specific examples of some of these equations, because it'll help explain things like why space and time are reversed inside an event horizon and stuff.
But, you bet, there's a whole mathematical theory. In fact, Einstein was not the world's greatest mathematician and it took him until 1917 to get all this worked out. He had to go and get himself some math tutoring at the University of Göttingen and--so that he could understand the geometric properties. So, yeah, there's a big mathematical theory behind it. Yes?
Student: So, if gravity is not a force, how can you use F = ma?
Professor Charles Bailyn: F = ma is a general equation of motion. It doesn't have to be the force of gravity. There are many other forces in the world.
Student: But when you're setting F = ma to GMM or [inaudible]
Professor Charles Bailyn: Right, so, that's the Newtonian idea, that you set F = ma equal to GMM over D2. And the thing that prompted Einstein's thought was the fact that the two different kinds of masses on each side of the equation turned out to be equal. And you can see why this explains that. Because, if what's happening is that you curve space, and then things follow a trajectory dictated by the curvature of that space, then it makes perfect sense that all objects follow the same trajectory, regardless of their mass. Because they're not actually being forced to move anywhere. They're just going in straight lines, and straight lines are the same no matter what your mass is. And so, that's why this kind of curvature provides an explanation for what, in the Newtonian approximation, is the equality of the inertial and the gravitational mass. How we doing? Oh, we've got some more time, good. Go ahead.
Student: Would a clock really slow down as it moved towards the [inaudible]
Professor Charles Bailyn: Yeah.
Student: [inaudible] would you have a perception of [inaudible]
Professor Charles Bailyn: Well, of course, you are a clock, right? You're--no, you wouldn't notice. But what would happen is this. Supposing you're falling into a black hole, or something. You look at your clock. You feel your pulse, you know. Your pulse measured by your clock has not changed. But you look back out into the world that is distant from the black hole, and things are moving really fast out there. And so, if you had two synchronized, identical clocks at the start of your voyage, and you keep an eye on what's happening out here, you will discover that, all of a sudden, it looks like your clock is moving slow. And, all of a sudden, you know, people are aging and dying back on Earth, while, you know, it's only been a week in your perception.
And so, turn it around. You're sitting on Earth watching your friend fall through--fall into a black hole. And it looks like he's slowing down, and slowing down, and slowing down and maybe--and never really quite gets to the event horizon, even in an infinite amount of time. But the perception of the person falling through is that they just fall through. It's just, the whole Universe is evolved in the time that they've done it.
So, it's one of these weird things where time turns out--how fast time passes turns out to be a property of who's doing the measuring. Very strange concept, and very counterintuitive to the way we live our life. Because we all think--because we live in low gravitational fields at low speeds, we think time is an absolute thing that ticks onward for everybody in the same way, but it turns out it isn't true.
Yes? And again, I'll show you an equation that--actually, this is much easier to deal with in equations than it is conceptually, and I'll show you an equation next time which may help.
Student: Can you explain about the names behind the two theories of relativity? I mean, it doesn't seem like the general theory is a generalization of the special theory.
Professor Charles Bailyn: It actually is, because it incorporates aspects of the special theory. And it's a generalization in terms of what's called the metric. The metric is the mathematical formula that describes the curvature. And the special theory of relativity is the special case where the metric is flat. And then, the reason general relativity is a generalization is because it allows other--many other kinds of metrics. Or, at least, that's one way of thinking about it. Yes sir.
Student: [Inaudible]
Professor Charles Bailyn: Yeah well I--too small for me to draw.
Student: [Inaudible]
Professor Charles Bailyn: The wiggle is from the motion of the Earth around the Sun. And it's caused by--the mass of the Sun warps the space--
Student: [Inaudible]
Professor Charles Bailyn: Yeah, yeah, yeah. It's just--all I meant in the second one--sorry, I didn't explain this clearly. All I meant in the second one was that this one is inaccurate in terms of scale.
Student: Okay, oh I see.
Professor Charles Bailyn: And that the scale, the true scale, is such that this length ought to be 10,000 times longer than that. And under those circumstances you'd never be able to see it. That's all I meant by that. Yeah?
Student: What happens to time when you're caught traveling--you mentioned this, but what happens to time when you're traveling close to the speed of light?
Professor Charles Bailyn: Slows down yeah. Yes?
Student: [Inaudible]
Professor Charles Bailyn: So, how does, how does this work? Right. We are, you know--you can explain the motion of the Earth in terms of these so-called space-time diagrams, where one--you take the four-dimensional thing. You project it onto two dimensions. You can write a space-time diagram for yourself, and you can explain all of the motion and all of the things that happen by such a curved thing. So, what happens if you jump, for example? In the Newtonian theory, you jump, you ought to keep going straight up, except that there is a force, which pulls you back down. So, that we understand.
What happens--how is that explained in general relativity? You jump and you go in a straight line, but the straight line is through a curved space--curved because of the presence of the Earth. And so, it turns out that the straight line looks like this. It goes up and comes back down again, in just the same way that the straight line between New York and Beijing goes over the North Pole. It goes up and comes back down again, because space-time is curved due to the gravity of the Earth.
So, something that we perceive to be a curved trajectory--jumping up, falling back down--if you project it into space-time, is actually the closest distance between two events. So, there's two alternative explanations of these things.
In the situation where you're nowhere near a black hole, it turns out that, mathematically, they're exactly equivalent. If they're exactly equivalent, it's much easier to calculate the Newtonian way, and much easier to think about it. So, until you get into a situation where the Schwarzschild radius is comparable to the distances involved, you're way better off thinking Newtonian, because we're just better at it. Yes?
Student: I understand that in order to get units that you can line up in any way, uniquely, you need to multiply time by a velocity. But I'm a little confused about--I mean I know that c is this really important number--
Professor Charles Bailyn: Yeah.
Student: - but if the only reason why the wiggles in the graph of motion are really tiny is because c is so enormous. I mean -
Professor Charles Bailyn: Couldn't you pick another velocity?
Student: Right.
Professor Charles Bailyn: Yeah.
Student: What makes that an accurate scaling?
Professor Charles Bailyn: Okay, so, the reason that's an accurate scaling is, one of the things that comes out of the theory of relativity is that there is a natural unit. There's a natural set of units. And the natural set of units are the units in which these crucial constants, of which c is one and G is another, and H--the Planck constant, which governs quantum mechanics, are all equal to one. And that turns--those are called Planck units, and they have--and the conversion between different kinds of energy, mass to energy, things like that, all work out as equalities in the particular set of units, where all those constants come out to be one.
So, there is a reason why that particular velocity is chosen, and it's not surprising, if you had to pick a velocity, that you would end up with the speed of light, which has this sort of profound importance. Okay, we'll continue next time.
[end of transcript]
ASTR 160 - Lecture 12 - Stellar Mass Black Holes
Chapter 1. Invariance in Special Relativity [00:00:00]
Professor Charles Bailyn: Okay, here's the plan for today. I want to do one last foray into relativity theory. And this is going to be a tricky one, so I hope you're all feeling mentally strong this morning. If not, we--gosh, we should have ordered coffee for everyone. And, in so doing, I want to introduce one key concept, and also answer at least three of the questions that you guys have asked before in a more--in more depth, and also relate the whole thing back to black holes. And then, having done that, we'll have some more questions. And then, having done that, I want to get back to astronomy; that is to say, to things in the sky that actually manifest these relativistic effects. So, that's where we're going today. And along the way, as I said, we'll deal with some of the questions you've been asking in a deeper kind of way. In particular--so, questions.
Watch out for the answers to these questions. Somebody asked, "What's special about special relativity, and what's general about general relativity?" How do they relate? So, we'll come back to that one. Somebody also asked, "Why use the speed of light to convert time into space and vice versa, to get them in the same coordinate system?" So, why use cto convert time to space and vice versa? And then, also, there was the question of, you know, "What is the mathematical formulation of general relativity?" So, how to express general relativity in some kind of equation. And we'll get to the key equation, which is something called a metric, for general relativity, and then we're going to stop. Because to go on from there is fairly heavy calculus and we're just not going to do that. But I want to get at least that far.
Okay, so let's go back to special relativity for a minute. So, special relativity. Flat space-time, no gravity. And you'll recall what happens. As you get close to the speed of light, all sorts of things that you thought were kind of constant and properties of objects, like mass and length and duration, and duration of time, and things like that, all start to get weird and change. So, length, time, mass, all these things, vary with the velocity of the person doing the measuring.
And so, you could ask the question, is there anything that doesn't vary? Is there anything that's an invariant? And the answer is, yes. There are some things that don't vary. So, some things are invariant. And Einstein actually said later in his career that it's actually the invariants that are important, not the things that change. And so, he should have called his theory invariant theory instead of relativity theory. Think of what that would have done to pop philosophy. Instead of saying, "everything is relative," all this stuff, you would have had the exact same theory. You would have called it invariance theory. And the pop philosophy interpretation of this would be, "some things never change." And it would have been a whole different concept in three in the morning dorm room conversations.
Okay, so some things are invariant, what things? Now, let me first give you a little bit of a metaphor and then come back to how this really works in space-time. Supposing you're just looking at an xy-coordinate system and you have two points in a two-dimensional space. So, here's a point and here's a point. Now, if you arrange for some kind of coordinate system--here's a coordinate system. This is x, this is y--and you ask how far apart these points are. Well, you can do that--let's see. They're separated in x by this amount here, which we'll call delta [Δ] x. And they're separated in y by this amount here, and that's Δ y. But of course, those quantities depend on the orientation of your coordinate system. If I now take this coordinate system and I shift it like this, now it's going to be totally different. Now I'm going to have x look like this and I'm going to have y, Δ y look like that. So Δ y has gotten a whole lot smaller. Δ x has gotten a whole lot bigger. And all I did was twist the coordinate system. Yeah?
Student: [Inaudible.]
Professor Charles Bailyn: You still get the same distance, thank you very much, that's exactly right. The distance is the invariant. The x-coordinate and the y-coordinate, those vary with the coordinate system, but the distance is the same. That's exactly the point. And so, the quantity--let me summarize this.
For points on a 2-D space, Δ x varies. Δ y varies. But there is a quantity that is invariant and that is--well, let's call it (Δ x2) + (Δ y2), which is the distance squared, (Δ D2). And this is invariant. It doesn't matter which way you twist things around, that will--that quantity will remain the same.
So, now, imagine that you've got events in space-time. So an event in space-time has three spatial coordinates and one time coordinate. So, it's basically a point in a four-dimensional space. And as your velocity changes, the distance and time also change. That's the equivalent of rotating the coordinate system.
But there is something that doesn't change, and let me write that down. This is usually given the Greek letter Tau [T] squared. And this is equal to (Δ x2) + (Δ y2) + (Δ Z2) - c2 (ΔT)2. And this is invariant. This is an invariant interval, sometimes called proper distance. And as you change your velocity--as the space, as the mass, as the time all change--this quantity, describing the separation of two events--so, this describes the separation of two events, that quantity changes--doesn't change. That quantity is invariant.
Okay, so now, this answers one of the questions that was asked before. Why does one use c2 or c to transform the space coordinate into the time coordinate and back? It's because you need the c2 out here in order to make this invariant. If you're calculating the distance, if you use x2 plus ½ y2 or some other constant times y2, you're not going to get something that's invariant. And it's only when you use the c, here, that you end up with something that's invariant.
And so, if you think about these as representing the four coordinates of the system, it's clear this one coordinate is x, one is y, one is z, just as you would expect. And then, there's this other coordinate, which is c times T, but it's negative so it has to be times the square root of -1. So, the four coordinates in space-time can be thought of as x, y, Z and i cT, if you want to think of it that way. And the time coordinate is imaginary, because when you square it, you have to end up with a negative number. Don't worry about the details of that. But the presence of the c2 here is why you have to use c, in particular, to get from time to space and back. And that's necessary because this is the thing that doesn't vary with velocity.
Chapter 2. Invariant Intervals and the Schwarzschild Metric [00:10:10]
All right. So, this is actually kind of a weird expression. Because unlike the distance between two points--and you'll notice, these three terms put together, that's just the distance squared, ordinarily, but that is not invariant anymore, because there's this other term here, which can vary. Unlike the distance, this doesn't have to be positive. You've got three different cases here. This interval can be zero for different points. In ordinary distance it can only be zero if the two points are the same, but this can be zero for different points, for different events. It can be zero, it can be negative, and it can be positive. So, what does that mean? What happens when it's zero?
So, if the interval is zero, that means that the distance between the events in light-years, for example, is equal to the time separation in years, because that's--because this term has to be exactly equal to that term there, in order for them to subtract out and get zero. And the c2 converts from light-years to years and back again.
And so, what does that mean? That means if you emit a photon at one event, that same photon can, if it's going in the right direction, be present at the second event. So, if you ride along with light you'll see both--you'll participate in both these events. So, you sit at event one. You flash a light. You ride along with the expanding light waves from that event and you get to something one light-year away, exactly a year later. And so, if the second event is one light-year away in distance and a year later in time, that same photon will be present at the second event, as at the first event. So, things that have one of these intervals of zero are separated by an appropriate amount so that the same ray of light can participate in both of them. So, if the interval--let's keep that up there for a minute.
If the interval is negative, what does that mean? The distance is less than the light travel time. So, the photon is already past the second event. So, if you were to emit a ray of light at event number one, it would have passed the second event by the time it occurred. The photon has already gone by. And similarly, if the interval is positive, then the light photon hasn't reached event two--hasn't yet reached event two. Now, this is important, because this means that you can't communicate from event one to event two. So, if you're at event two, you don't know what happened at event one. Because even if you'd sent out a signal, a radio signal or whatever, it would not have reached you by the time event two takes place. So you can't communicate from event one to event two. And similarly, you can't travel from event one and reach event two, because you'd have to go faster than the speed of light to do it. These kinds of intervals, these negative intervals, these are called time-like, because the time term is larger than the distance turn. And these kinds of intervals are called space-like intervals. And you can only travel or communicate over time-like intervals. Yes?
Student: What are these so-called events?
Professor Charles Bailyn: So, they're events--you can think of them as points in space-time. So, they have a particular position in space and a particular point in time. So, they can be described by four numbers, three spatial coordinates and a time coordinate. They can be anything. You know, turning on a light, doing anything you want to do. Receiving a photon, whatever it is. But they are points in a four-dimensional space-time and therefore require four numbers to describe them. And you can only get from one to another if they're separated from a time-like, that is to say, a negative, interval.
Okay, so this expression, which I'll write down again, this is called a metric. And the particular metric that I've written down here is the metric for flat space. Because remember, this is special relativity. There's no masses, no curvature of space, none of that stuff, yet. This is the metric for flat space with no mass present.
And there are many other metrics possible. Any time you add mass or do other things, you get different kinds of metrics more complicated than this. So, what's special about special relativity is that you use the metric appropriate for flat space as opposed to the many other different kinds of metrics that you can use in general relativity, which has a much more general form for the metric.
I should say, you can also write this down. You can write down the spatial terms here in polar coordinates. Remember polar coordinates? Polar coordinates, you describe the position in space, instead of with x, y, Z, you describe it with a radius, a distance from zero, and some angles. And it turns out, that's convenient to do so. Let me write this down in polar coordinates, or in polar. That's an r. Let me write that explicitly. This is an Omega, that's some angle. And then the Tthing remains the same. And I've pulled a little bit of a notational fast one on you here. I've gone away from the deltas and I've written these down as d. This is the differential d. Those of you who have taken some calculus will remember this. If this were a calculus-based course I would explain why I did that, but I'm not going to. So, just allow me this slight of hand, here. For technical reasons, these have to be differential. Yes?
Student: But you do need a second angle term for the [inaudible]
Professor Charles Bailyn: I do need a second angle term. I should say--good point. You need two angles and a distance in three space. This capital Omega here is actually--Omega squared is actually sin θ, d ?, d ?, which is the correct form. And so you could write out both terms here, but in fact, this one isn't going to change. But you're absolutely right. In principle, you need two angles.
Okay, why have I done this? Excellent question. I ask myself a question at this point. Where am I going? What I want to do now is write down a different metric. A metric that actually involves curved space and the presence of a mass. And this is something called the Schwarzschild metric. Remember Schwarzschild? He had a radius. And this is the appropriate metric for the presence of a single point mass at the center of the coordinate system, at R = 0. That's why I put it into polar coordinates, because the presence of the mass is going to change the space-time as a function of distance--from radial distance from where the mass is. And so, it's much more convenient for the Schwarzschild metric to use this in polar coordinates.
So, here's the Schwarzschild metric, (d T2), that's the--this is the interval, is equal to (dR) / (1 - Rs / R). So, that's just like the flat term, except with something in the denominator there. Plus R2, d Omega squared, that's just like the flat metric. And then the--whoops this had better be - c2 (1 - RS / R) (cT) 2. Where RS is the Schwarzschild radius, which we've had before, which is 2GM / c2.
Chapter 3. Schwarzschild Sign Changes and Space-Time Reversals [00:21:01]
Okay, so this is just like the flat metric with two exceptions. It's got a term in the radial part of this 1 - RS / R. And it's got that same term, but this time in the numerator, in the time term here. Now, what do you do with this--with such an equation? Well, we've done--in special relativity, we've dealt with these kinds of things. What you do is you start taking the limiting cases. You say, okay, what happens when it's getting really close to flat on the one hand, and what's happening when it's getting very seriously relativistic on the other hand? So let's do that.
If RS / R goes to zero, then the metric turns into the flat metric. Because if RS / R = 0, this term disappears because it's 1 - 0, and it just cancels. This term disappears and you recover the flat metric. This happens in two cases. If the mass goes to zero, then RS goes to zero, and you recover the flat metric. Or if R gets really big, then RS / R goes to zero, and again, you recover the flat metric. So in--there are two situations where Schwarzschild metric blends smoothly into the ordinary flat space. One is if the mass is zero, that's not surprising. If the mass is zero then space-time isn't curved. Or alternatively, if you're really, really far away from the mass. If R is much, much bigger than the Schwarzschild radius, you're way out there. There's no gravitational effect. Space-time remains flat. So, these the--this is the limiting case where you recover special relativity.
Now, the other case is when R gets close to the Schwarzschild radius and approaches it. So then 1 - RS / R approaches zero, because these two are going to get closer and closer together. 1 - 1 = 0. What happens then? So, this is now, first of all--in physical terms you're getting really close to the Schwarzschild radius. So now, what happens to the metric if you do that? The dR term gets very big, because it's got a zero in the denominator. The dT term gets really small, because it's got that thing that's going to zero in the numerator.
Fine. What does that mean? Well, remember, this is the negative term. This is the positive term. So the positive term is getting really, really big. The negative term is getting really, really small. And that means that all intervals are gradually becoming space-like. What do I mean by that? Well, the negative term is getting small. One of the positive terms is getting big. So the sum of those tends to be positive. It's becoming more and more positive. Positive intervals are these space-like intervals, and you can't communicate or travel across space-like intervals. When you get all the way to the Schwarzschild radius, this blows up completely, becomes infinite. This becomes zero, and there are no time-like intervals.
There are no time-like intervals that cross the event horizon. That's why you can't get out. This takes us back to the basic principle of black holes.
So, cannot communicate or travel over space-like intervals. And so, you can't cross R equals the Schwarzschild radius. All right. Let's see. Let me write the thing down again, here, for you. Okay, so that's the metric we're worrying about here.
And now, let's think about what happens inside the Schwarzschild radius. R less than RSchwarzschild. That means the dRterm becomes negative, because 1 - RS / R. If RS is bigger than R then this term is--this term is greater than 1, and this whole thing is less than zero, and the signs change. And the dT term becomes positive. So, that means this is the time-like term, where this one is the space-like term, because it's positive.
That's what I meant three, four, five lectures ago, when I said that inside the Schwarzschild radius, when you're inside the Schwarzschild radius, space and time reverse. It's a sign change in the metric. That's what it means. And you can only travel along negative intervals. That means you have to move in R the same way outside the Schwarzschild radius you have to move in T. But notice it's only the radial term. This term hasn't changed. You could go around in circles, but whatever you do, you still have to move, as it turns out, toward the center of the thing in radius, in order to have a time-like interval. And so, motion in R is required for inside the Schwarzschild radius, whereas motion in T is required outside. So space and time reverse.
All of which is very nice, but I've left out something--I've left something out, which is the fact--inside the event horizon, how do you know that this is still the metric? One could invent some function that looks just like this outside the Schwarzschild radius, but then looks like something else inside the Schwarzschild radius. And because no communication across the Schwarzschild radius is possible, you'd never be able to test it. And so, this is how one gets away with doing non-testable physics. You say, well, we're just going to assume that the metric hasn't changed. Why should it change? After all, it's the same equation. But inside the Schwarzschild radius you can't actually test this.
Outside the Schwarzschild radius you can test it, because you see whether objects behave as they ought to behave in a space that's curved in this particular way--in a space-time that's curved in this particular way. And so, this is what I meant by, five classes ago, by saying space and time reverse. These two quantities reverse their signs.
All right, that's as far as we can go, because the next thing that one would want to do is, you find out what the equation is for finding out how things move in these curved space-times. Basically, you remember, things go from one event to another in the shortest possible path, that's the equivalent of a straight line. That means if you integrate over dT, it has to be minimized. So, you minimize this integral. That tells you how things move. We're not going to do that. Sighs of relief? And because--for obvious reasons. So, this is as far as we can go, just to write down the metric here. So, let me know pause for questions, and then we're going to go back and talk about astronomy--about things in the sky that actually exhibit these relativistic behaviors. Yes?
Student: You were talking before about intervals, and how all the intervals are negative. What exactly is one interval? [Inaudible]
Professor Charles Bailyn: Sorry?
Student: What exactly is one interval? [Inaudible]
Professor Charles Bailyn: Oh, an interval. So, what I'm doing is I'm taking two events, each of which is one of these points in space-time, and I'm asking, "What is the interval between them?" What is--you could measure the distance between them, you could measure the time from one event to another. But as it turns out, those aren't invariants. And so, there's this other thing, the metric, which is invariant. And so, that's a measure--an invariant measure of how separated these two events are. So, you take two events and you ask yourself, "Are they separated by zero, a positive quantity or a negative quantity?" Where by separation, I mean, this curious combination of space and time.
Student: So the intervals are before the metric, before the interval?
Professor Charles Bailyn: Yeah, it's an interval--think of--let me go back to the analogy I started with. Here's--in two spatial dimensions, x and x, here are two points. And depending on how I set the coordinate system up, the x-distance--the x difference between them and the y difference between them can change, but the distance is always the same. So now, I've got two points with--each with and x, y, Z and a T. And depending on how I change my velocity or my coordinates the particular values of x, y, Z, and T can change, but this (Δ T2) defined by--I'm in flat space now, right? This separation, this interval between those two points, this is the invariant--in the same way that the distance between two points doesn't change if you change the coordinate system, even though the x and y separations do.
Student: [Inaudible]
Professor Charles Bailyn: It gives you--no. Well, it combines these four things into one thing that doesn't change. That's the point. Yes?
Student: Is there a way that you can--like as an interval from zero basically describes two events that appear simultaneous?
Professor Charles Bailyn: As the--yeah exactly.
Student: So, is that then collapsed into a Newtonian theory, things with two--things appear simultaneously if they happen at the same time --
Professor Charles Bailyn: Well okay. So, there's two different ways things can appear, quote, simultaneously. One is if they are two different events in space-time and light travels from one, and they're exactly separated by--the amount of time between them is the same as the distance between them if you multiply by c2. They can also appear simultaneously if they are the same point as each other. And then everything goes to zero. And it's only in that second case that it--that the Newtonian concept of simultaneous kicks in. Simultaneous is usually taken to mean that the time separation is zero. Two things happen simultaneously when they happen at the same time.
Student: [Inaudible]
Professor Charles Bailyn: On Earth the--the distances and the velocities and the gravitational fields are never so strong that you have any trouble--that the Δ T changes significantly depending on what your point of view is. So, in our everyday life, we have a strong concept of simultaneity. It's two things that happen at the same time. Turns out, though, that if you move at close to the speed--if you observe two events to be at the same time and I'm moving at close to the speed of light, I don't observe those two events at the same time, even though you do. And so, at that point, you have to abandon the Newtonian concept that Δ T = 0 tells you that two events are simultaneous. And the whole concept of simultaneity takes on a different task. Other questions, yes?
Student: [Inaudible]
Professor Charles Bailyn: Okay, so these units can be any units of length you like provided that--any units of length you like, provided the time units are related to it by c. That is to say, if your distance units are light-years, your time units have to be years. If your distance units are meters, then your time units are some kind of meter, light-meter-second thing. And so, the only restriction on the units you use is that the time and the space units have to be convertible into each other through c2.
Or, alternatively, another way of saying it is, you use any units you like, and as long as you express the speed of light in those units. If you have a time unit and a space unit, if you're in--if you're measuring your space in furlongs and your time in fortnights, as long as your c is in furlongs per fortnight, it's going to come out okay. So, as long as it's convertible. Other questions?
Okay, if you don't get all the details and nuance of what I've said this period, don't worry too much about it. I just wanted to get the concept of the metric out there and show you how, if you look at that equation these concepts of space and time reversing, and so forth, have a kind of mathematical consequence, as well as just spouting words. And if you get, sort of, the basic outline of the argument, that's fine.
Chapter 4. Evidence for General Relativity in Astronomy [00:36:27]
Okay, back to actual things in actual--that actually exist. So, what I want to talk about now is evidence for general relativity from astronomical objects--real black holes, stuff like that. Now, one of the curious things about this is that when Einstein thought all this stuff up, he thought it up from basically these philosophical concerns about mass ‒ that the inertial mass turned out to always be equal to the gravitational mass. Why would that be? And there wasn't, when he thought it up, a great body of evidence for his theory in the real world.
This is in contrast to special relativity. Special relativity, there were all these experiments that needed to be explained. General relativity--very, very little. In fact, when Einstein first put forward the theory in 1917, there was only one thing that had ever been observed that actually showed an effect of general relativity, and that was the orbit of Mercury, which you're reading about for this week's problem set.
So, just going back a little bit, in the nineteenth century, people had observed the orbits of planets in great detail. And they found out that two of the planets were moving in ways they couldn't quite explain. There were very small deviations from the predictions orbit. In particular, the orbit of Uranus was a little weird. And that was quickly explained by the presence of an unknown--hitherto unknown planet, which was also exerting a gravitational force on Uranus and pulling it out of the orbit that it should have been, by a very small amount, because the gravitational force of another planet is very small compared to that of the Sun. But by the middle of the nineteenth century they could measure such things. And they therefore predicted the presence of this other planet, of Neptune, and they calculated where it should be. And some guy went off and observed in that spot and found it--predicted presence of Neptune and discovered it in the predicted place. Big triumph! Everybody--if they had had Nobel Prizes back then, they would have won it for this, for sure. And then, there was a whole big kerfuffle because they couldn't decide whether the French guy had done it before the English guy, or vice versa. And they argued with each other for decades about who gets the credit. But in scientific terms, there was a prediction, and the prediction was verified. Excellent news.
Now, there was also a problem with the orbit of Mercury--also perturbed, from what you would expect. And having had this big triumph in the Outer Solar System, they figured, well, we know how to deal with this. There's got to be another planet in there. So, they predict the presence of a planet called Vulcan, which then disappears from the scientific literature until it's resurrected by Star Trek. But Vulcan--the concept of Vulcan was, this was going to be a planet that's closer to the Sun than Mercury. That's why they haven't been able to find it, because it's too near the Sun to be easily observed. And it's going to pull on Mercury in such a way that it's going to explain the problems with the orbit of Mercury. And so, they then look for Vulcan in the predicted place, and they find it. And then somebody else finds it. And they find it many times and each time it's different--all different.
And it gradually becomes clear that everybody's fooling themselves. That there's no--this is a really hard observation to make, right? Because the thing is right near to the Sun. And so, it turns out that all of this is wrong. None of these observations are really any good. It's not repeatable--so, not really.
And so, after some attempts to find Vulcan--and then, they rule out the presence of Vulcan in various places. So, then the people calculating the orbits have to go back and say, well, if Vulcan isn't there, maybe there are two or three planets combining together to do the thing that we originally wanted Vulcan to do. This gets sort out of control after a while. And at a certain point, people just kind of give up, and they say, well, it's a great big mystery about Mercury. And after a while, after that, people kind of even stopped caring. Because, you know, we know Newton's laws worked. This is just some weirdness about Mercury that we don't understand.
And then, when Einstein creates his new theory of gravity, he then computes in the new theory of Mercury's orbit. And he now gets something that agrees with the observations, without the need for a new planet. And so, what happened was, Mercury's orbit is a little different from the Newtonian prediction. The general relativity prediction is a little bit different in just the same way to explain this problem that people had been trying to solve for fifty years unsuccessfully. And so, this was the first verification, empirical verification, of general relativity. And if you think about it, you would expect that Mercury would be the place you would find this out.
For Mercury, RS / R, this is the Schwarzschild radius of the Sun because that's what's doing the gravitating, is the biggest in the Solar System. Because the R, the distance from Mercury to the Sun, is the smallest of any of the planets in the Solar System. And so, the relativistic effects, the general relativity effects, are relatively large. But, you know, this is still a really small number. This is 3 kilometers, the Schwarzschild radius of the Sun. Mercury is way out there somewhere.
So, even though this is the most--this is the biggest relativistic effect in the Solar System, it still isn't that huge. Let me just remind you what this effect is. Here's the Sun. Mercury's going around the Sun. And it's going around in a slightly elliptical orbit. I'm going to draw a very elliptical orbit, here, but it's really not that big. And there's a point in the orbit where it is closest to the Sun. That point is called the perihelion[cn]. "Peri" for close, "helios" for Sun--of Mercury. And in the Newtonian theory, you should have exactly the same orbit every time. You should come back and the perihelion should be in the same place in each successive orbit. The orbit doesn't move or doesn't change.
But, in general relativity, the perihelion moves. So, after a while the perihelion will be here. The whole orbit will kind of tip this way, and it'll look like this. So, this is the perihelion later. And it looks like that. And the angle which the perihelion makes with the Sun has changed. This angle is called the angle of the perihelion. And this precesses. So this is called the precession of the perihelion. And it's measured in some angle per time. Because the question is, "How long does it take for the perihelion to precess across some angle?" And the key number for Mercury is 43 arc seconds. Remember arc seconds? Those are small angles. Per century ‒ a really small movement, but something that can be measured, and had been measured. And it's not surprising that this is small, because the relativistic effects are going to be small, because the Schwarzschild radius of the Sun is really small compared to the size of the orbit of Mercury.
But this was observed before Einstein made his theory. Nobody understood it. Einstein came up with his theory. It turned out it predicted a precession of the perihelion in a way that Newton didn't, and it turned out to work out precisely. So, that was good. And at the time Einstein published the theory, this was the only piece of evidence that it was correct. Pretty small empirical verification.
And so, let's just write down the fable, here. This is Einstein and the precession of the perihelion. And there are two versions of the moral. Sometimes in textbooks, you know, they make a big deal out of this. They say, oh, there was this terrible problem with Mercury, and then Einstein came along with this great new theory, solved that problem. In the same way that they say, there was this terrible problem with the speed of light being constant from all frames, and Einstein came along with special relativity and solved that problem. That's a misreading of history.
This was a by-product of Einstein. It wasn't that there was a problem with the data and he went out to try and fix the theory to conform with the data. There was very little data. So, the moral here is aesthetic considerations, aesthetic--perhaps you want to call this philosophical, considerations can lead to a good new theory because he didn't really do it to explain the data.
This is, however, the only time I can think of where this actually happened this way. Every other major advance in science came about because the observers or the experimenters had a problem--but not G.R. Only for general relativity.
Now, subsequent to that, between 1917, when this theory was promulgated, and now, there have been a variety of tests of general relativity using astronomical objects. You always have to use astronomical--or almost always have to use astronomical objects to test this, because you need really strong gravitational fields, and it's hard to produce a really strong gravitational field in the laboratory. You're kind of limited to what the Earth provides you with, and that isn't such a strong gravitational field. We computed, at some point, the Schwarzschild radius of the Earth, R / RSchwarzschild is the relevant quantity, and it's really small from the Earth's gravitational field. So, it's hard to see these things. So, all these tests tend to be astronomical in nature. Since then, a variety of tests of G.R., and the punch line is that it passes all of them. G.R. is still a good theory. There's no contradictory data. But the tests still aren't as strong as you might have hoped they would be. And we'll talk about some of those on Thursday.
[end of transcript]
STR 160 - Lecture 13 - Stellar Mass Black Holes (cont.)
Chapter 1. Defining Black Holes in Terms of the Schwarzschild Radius
Professor Charles Bailyn: Last time, I wrote down the Schwarzschild metric, which was the sort of culmination of the theoretical part of the--of this section of the course. And I realized, as I was talking to some of you afterwards about some of the implications of this, that the way I--one of the ways in which I wrote it down might have been a little confusing. So, let me write it down again and I'll say a couple things.
And what I'm going to do is I'm going to write it down with a little r instead of a capital R and I'll tell you why in just a minute. Obviously, it doesn't matter. I've just changed the notation slightly. And the reason I want to do this is because I want to emphasize that this r, the little r, what I've now written down as a little r in this equation, is not the radius of the object; r is just a coordinate. It can be anything. It's not the radius of the object for which the mass is giving you the Schwarzschild radius. The Schwarzschild radius is a very specific radius.
rs = 2GM / c2 so that's a specific number. The little r, here, is just a coordinate and so is φ and θ, which combine into this thing which I've called Omega [Ω] and T.
And so if you have an object of mass M and radius--I'll give--I'll call that R0 just to make sure that you understand that this is the radius of the object. The radius of the object doesn't come into this metric. The mass does, because the mass turns into the Schwarzschild radius and that's part of the equation. But the radius of the object doesn't matter.
And so, if you then ask, well, what is a black hole? A black hole is something in which the radius of the object is less than the Schwarzschild radius. Because if that's true, then there is some coordinate r, some little r where little r = RS. And then, if you go up into these equations here very--these very strange things happen when little r is equal to RS. Yes, question?
Student: Yesterday, the big group had [Inaudible]
Professor Charles Bailyn: Oh you're right, you're right, it has to be the other way around, I'm sorry.
Student: [Inaudible]
Professor Charles Bailyn: This has to be squared. You're right on both counts, good. RS / r. Yes, it better be that way because RS / r in the normal part of space is less than 1. So, thank you very much, sorry about that. Okay, I think we're all right. Are we all right? Yeah, good.
Okay, so there is some r where r is equal to RS, and then these very bizarre things start to happen. If R0, the radius of the actual object, is bigger than its Schwarzschild radius, then that isn't true. There's no r where r is equal to RS--then no requal to RS. Now, you might think that somewhere inside the object, there would be a little r, which is equal to the Schwarzschild radius. But that isn't--that turns out not to be right either, because the relevant M, the relevant mass-
Student: Can you lower the top slide?
Professor Charles Bailyn: Oh sure.
Student: The whole--the slide not the -
Professor Charles Bailyn: Oh yeah, okay. So, yeah. Let me put this back. The relevant mass is the mass inside r. So if you're--if you've got some mass M, like this, and you're outside, if you're here, then the whole of the mass counts. But if you're sitting inside this thing, then the only mass that counts is this mass here. And so, for r--for coordinates for positions inside the object, then the relevant mass that you put into the equation is less than the mass of the whole object.
And the consequence of that is that, as you go further and further inside the thing, the mass becomes less and less, and the Schwarzschild radius becomes less and less. And so, if the total size of the object is greater than the Schwarzschild radius, then there is no position inside the thing which is less than the Schwarzschild radius, because the relevant mass decreases, and so does the Schwarzschild radius as you go in toward the center of the object.
So, I just wanted to make sure you understood that the key to using this metric is that the--this r term in it tells you where you are. It has nothing to do with the size of the object. And you become a black hole when the size of the object is smaller than the Schwarzschild radius. Because under those circumstances there's some position, or set of positions, where you can be inside the Schwarzschild radius, and therefore all of these very exotic effects start to happen. Questions on this? Or have I just baffled you further? Well, we'll see.
Student: Is that the radius of the Sun?
Professor Charles Bailyn: Sorry.
Student: Is that the radius of the Sun?
Professor Charles Bailyn: Oh no, this is the radius of the object. Sun is--Sun has a dot in the middle--not that you could tell with my handwriting. Okay, I don't know if--whether that was helpful or not, but I felt the need to say it. Yes, please.
Student: Could you please explain the diagram that you [Inaudible]
Professor Charles Bailyn: This right here? Yeah, so the situation is that--what is the relevant M to put into this equation? This is true, by the way, in Newtonian physics also. If you're inside an object then the mass outside of your position, this stuff, doesn't count toward the M. And you only want to count the mass inside of where you are.
Student: Okay, so that whole circle is an object?
Professor Charles Bailyn: Yeah, so this whole circle is an object--object with mass and some--with some mass and some radius. But now you're asking the question, "What happens if you're somewhere inside this thing?" Yes?
Student: Does that mean that the dotted line is RS?
Professor Charles Bailyn: No, the dot--well, the dotted line could be anything. You're at some position inside and this--the dotted line is the radius at which your particular position is.
Student: [Inaudible]
Professor Charles Bailyn: No, it's just wherever you are inside the thing. Less mass counts than you think it's going to because it's only the stuff inside your own radius that counts toward the metric, or toward the gravitational force in the Newtonian thing. You can be at--at whatever point you choose to be inside here, you can draw this same thing. And the point of this is that if you are now down in here, where you thought the Schwarzschild radius was going to be, for the whole of this mass--in fact, the Schwarzschild radius is still going to be inside your position because much less mass will count toward it. This isn't helping, I can tell by the look on your face. Okay, let me try again. Let me try again.
Okay, here's an object. And this object has a radius bigger than its Schwarzschild radius, and it's got some mass. Okay, so, now I'm going to draw, in dotted lines, its Schwarzschild radius. That's inside here, okay? Now, supposing you're inside this object. Supposing you're living here. Then, at that point, you--I draw this sort of interior radius, here. And if I'm at this point, then I ask, what is the Schwarzschild radius that goes into the metric for something that's sitting inside for person X, here. And the answer to that is it's actually smaller than the Schwarzschild radius of the entire object, because less mass counts. Only this mass counts towards the Schwarzschild radius. So, there's some part of the object whose mass no longer counts, because it's outside your position. And so, as I move in here to some interior point, the Schwarzschild radius that is appropriate for me to use becomes smaller. Does that make more sense?
Student: Can you draw that if it were a black hole?
Professor Charles Bailyn: Ah, so if I was black--if it was a black hole, right. Okay, so now, let's do the opposite case. Good question--is less than the Schwarzschild radius. So, now here's my object, and here's the Schwarzschild radius. That's the difference, right? And therefore--and the consequence of this, by the way, is that this whole object sinks down to a point. Because, remember, things inside the Schwarzschild radius have to contract down to a point. So, I can't be part way through it, no matter what I do. And, you know, if I'm outside this tiny little thing, if I'm here, I have the same Schwarzschild radius, because all of the mass is interior to my position. So, the key thing is, is the object smaller or bigger than its own Schwarzschild radius?
Student: So, in that case, all the mass is going to be closer than--
Professor Charles Bailyn: All the--yeah, all--well, all the mass--
Student: [Inaudible] is going to [Inaudible]
Professor Charles Bailyn: If the radius of the object is smaller than its Schwarzschild radius, then all the mass is inside the Schwarzschild radius. And any point in our Universe where, you know--and so, all r greater than RS is out here, somewhere, and it doesn't matter where you are. All that mass counts because it's all inside the Schwarzschild radius anyway. And then, when you get to this point, you have this magic moment where r = RS and everything blows up. Right? And that can't happen here. Because as you move in, in the middle of the object, the Schwarzschild radius shrinks down away from you as you get in, because less and less mass counts towards it, therefore it gets smaller. Yes?
Student: Would it be possible to have an object [inaudible] density--like such that there would be a point at which you would [inaudible]
Professor Charles Bailyn: Ah, okay. So, could you have some incredible density gradient where you're actually gaining more--you're actually catching up to the Schwarzschild radius as you go in. In principle, yes. But if you work out what that density gradient would have to be, it would be incredibly steep. Remember, there was a problem set at some point where we discovered that the less mass there is in a black hole, the denser it has to be in order to be inside its Schwarzschild radius. So, as you're losing mass as you get down in here, the amount by which it has to be denser on the inside goes up really sharply.
But yes, such a thing can be. Imagine, for example, a black hole with an atmosphere. Imagine there's some--or some, just, gas floating around out here. If you think of that as one object, then when you're outside the gas, if you think of the outer edge of the gas as the edge of the object, then that's not a black hole. And if you come on--if you go down--sink down into the atmosphere, eventually you'll find it. So, that's an incredibly steep density change because you've gone from an atmosphere to some object. So, in principle, that's possible. In any kind of real object that's holding itself up, probably not, because the density gradient would have to be so severe. Yes?
Student: How would this work for non-spherical objects?
Professor Charles Bailyn: How does it work for non-spherical objects? Excellent. Okay. So, let's see. What happens is, if you have a non-spherical--first of all, the gravitational forces are sufficiently strong near a--if you're anything close to a black hole, that you're likely to end up spherical.
The only way you don't is if you're spinning. Because then, you know, you bulge out at the center. Spinning black holes exist. They have a different metric. And the angular term becomes important because you're spinning around and it's a different metric. And the shape of the event horizon where r is equal to RS or the equivalent in this other metric, is non-spherical. And so, you can have non-spherical event horizons if the thing is spinning, because that has the effect of making the mass distribution different. And this is called Kerr black hole, it has a Kerr metric, K-E-R-R. And that's a different metric, and it's got a whole other set of terms that have to do with the rotation of the angular component.
But again, the same thing happens. When you get to some place, all the terms blow up but it's a non-spherical surface where that occurs. And you have to do it in cylindrical coordinates. It becomes a mess--not that it isn't a mess already. Other questions?
Chapter 2. Perihelions and Deflection of Light [00:15:44]
All right, let me go back to the effects of general relativity. We've already done one of these. So, what I'm going to talk about is the post-Newtonian gravitational effects. So, these are things where it just barely starts to deviate away from what the predictions of Newton's laws would be.
So, just to go back, if you take that metric and you kind of expand it in small quantities where the Schwarzschild radius is much, much smaller than wherever you are. And you take the first term of the expansion. Mathematically, it turns into the same things as Newton's laws. And so, when you're out there in more or less flat space, or close to flat space, then Newton's laws still apply, because the expansion of the metric gives you the exact same result.
As the gravitational forces become larger, you start to get post-Newtonian terms, and things start to be a little bit different from Newton. And we've already had one of these--so, post-Newtonian effect number one is the precession of the perihelion, where, unlike the prediction for Newton, the orbit doesn't exactly repeat. It sort of moves on a little bit each time. And you get one of these nice, sort of, Spirograph patterns, as an elliptical orbit gradually precesses, or gradually moves around.
So, that was the first one. And that was the first one that was seen. That was seen in Mercury, which is the planet you would expect to see such a thing, because it's closest to the Sun and therefore, RS / r is the largest number for Mercury--for any planet in the Solar System. So, Mercury. And, that actually turns out to have been known before Einstein actually worked out the general relativity.
So, now, post-Newtonian effect number two is the deflection of light. The whole idea, remember, is that there's the--is that gravity works because it curves space and objects moving along this curved space appear to have curved trajectories. That's true of light also. Light is also moving across this curved space. So, there's a prediction in general relativity that if you shine light near a massive object, it's the path that that light will take. It's curved. It's as if the light's being gravitationally attracted by this object,
So, let's see here. Imagine the following situation. Here are you, you're observing something. Here's a star. And the path that light takes to this star, from the star to your eye, is some kind of straight line. And so, that's where you perceive the star to be.
Now, supposing that along--that between you and this star, there's some object. So, here's an object with mass M, some massive object. Now, because the path is going to curve, the path that the light takes from the star to your eye is going to now look like something like this. And it's deflected by the presence of the mass, which curves the space that it's in.
That means, you think, because you're interpreting this as if the light is coming straight towards you, you think the star is here. Or it appears to be there. Because, you say, all right, what is the angle at which the light is coming into my eye? It's coming from there. You don't realize that the star is actually over there and the light has gone up toward the ceiling and bent back down to your eye. So, it's as if I'm looking up there and seeing the exit sign. Because the light from the exit sign has gone up to the ceiling, been bent around by some black hole or something, up at the top of the classroom, and come back down to my eye. Yeah?
Student: Well, I mean, wouldn't the light on the other side of the planet showing the massive thing also be [Inaudible]
Professor Charles Bailyn: Ah, it is possible, yes. It is possible. In this particular case, probably not, because there wouldn't be enough bend in order to get it in here. So, light going this way, for example--let me take another color before this gets too complicated. Light coming this way would bend like that and it would miss your eye. However, there are situations in which you see two images of the same object, one from each side. These are called gravitational lenses.
Student: Can you see many, many images?
Professor Charles Bailyn: In principle, if it's lined up exactly right. Imagine that it's perfectly aligned. Then you see this way, you see that way, and you see out of the paper and you can see a whole ring. This has actually been observed. Not the whole ring, but large parts of the ring, because it's never perfectly aligned. But you can see these things. These are called Einstein's rings, and you can actually see them. You can see these kinds of multiple images in cases where this is a very distant galaxy or quasar[co]. Quasars are very bright, very small, extragalactic objects. And this is an intervening galaxy or galaxy cluster. And you can see these multiple images. I'll bring some pictures in next time. They're very--they're amazing-looking things.
It's often true that you can see four images. That comes about when the intervening mass is not spherical. And so, you get weird deflections and you--they're multiple directions. You see the same object--a very spectacular thing. These were discovered only recently but it turns out that you can observe this effect even in our own Solar System. Because what you can do--I'll bring in some pictures of gravitational lenses, those are amazing things. And what also happens is, if you're looking at something big, like a galaxy, that has a shape, it distorts the shape. It stretches the whole thing out, and you get these amazing pictures. All right.
Chapter 3. Hunting Eclipses [00:22:44]
In any case, in our own Solar System, you see this in the following way. Here's the Sun, and here's a star right behind the Sun. And the light from the star comes like this, and so you think the star is here. So, if you look at a star when it's right next to the Sun, right at the edge of the Sun, it seems to be in a different position relative to stars further--relative to other stars up here. Here's another star. Then it would--if you looked at it at night when the Sun wasn't in the way. Yes?
Student: Then how do you do astronomy during the daytime?
Professor Charles Bailyn: Excellent question, I'm getting to that. Okay, so--but the principle is--supposing the Sun were dark, okay. Look at star behind the Sun, or right next to the Sun, really. You can't see through the Sun. I'm not that crazy. Star behind Sun. And it appears to be in a different place, position, than when observed at night, without the Sun in the way.
Okay, so how do you do astronomy during the daytime? That's a good question.
Student: Eclipses.
Professor Charles Bailyn: Eclipses, yes. You wait until there's a solar eclipse and then you do your observation. Do this by observing during an eclipse. And if you do this, the position, the change in position of the star, if it's right at the edge of the Sun--and you've now blocked the Sun, because here's the Moon, right? And the light from the Sun doesn't come through. This change in position, that's an angle, is around 1 arc second. And that's a positional change you can observe. Remember the size of--the apparent size of a star, when you look at it, is about 1 arc second. So, it seems like it shifted a significant amount.
And so, you go, you take a picture of the sky, of the stars behind the Sun, during a total eclipse of the Sun. Now, the problem with this is a practical problem. Total eclipses of the Sun happen only for very short amounts of time, and only occasionally, and only in a small--over a small portion of the Earth at any one time. How many people have seen an eclipse of the Sun? Pretty spectacular thing, huh? But, you know, you have to travel to get there. It doesn't come to you.
So, here's what happened. In 1917, Einstein publishes his theory of general relativity. And then, in 1919, there's going to be an eclipse in Brazil, I think it was. Eclipse in Brazil. And it seems like a good idea that you should actually go and test this theory, which has made a very specific prediction about what ought to be going on with these stars. So Eddington, we've heard of him before, he's the guy who trashed his student Chandrasekhar some years later. But at the time he was young, up-and-coming British scientist, mounts an expedition to Brazil to test this theory.
And it works. Goes down there, he takes these pictures. It does just what Einstein said. And this is the event that makes Einstein into a great international figure. This is front-page headlines around the world. And part of the reason of why it was is, look at these dates. Einstein is a German scientist. This is the middle of World War I. And so, in the middle of World War I a German scientist--he's later thought of as a Jewish scientist, but at the time, Hitler was not yet on the scene. And so, Einstein was thought of as a German scientist. So, this German scientist publishes a grand, bizarre, new theory of the Universe right after the war. The Brits mount an operation to go and check and see if this is right, and it turns out to be correct.
So, this is now right after World War I, in the era when everybody thought, well, we're never going to have a war again. There's going to be peace and justice and brotherhood throughout the world for the rest of time. And as part of this, the British mount an expedition to confirm a German theory of science. And this is regarded as a huge sign of the great new future that we're moving into of international cooperation. And a consequence of this--this is front-page news all over the world, and it makes Einstein famous. This is what makes Einstein famous.
So, the fable, here, is the 1919 eclipse expedition. And the moral that was drawn at the time is, the great international, is how science is this wonderful international--maybe even universal--quest. And, in retrospect, what it is, is, it's a great demonstration of, you know, how science is supposed to work. New theory makes a prediction. You go out and measure the effect, and it works. So, this is, science works as advertised.
Except, you know, maybe it doesn't. Because subsequently, in subsequent years, people looked back at the apparatus that Eddington and his team had put together and said, you know, you can't actually make measurements that accurate with this stuff. So, how were they able to make this measurement? And, oddly enough, for about fifty years, the photographic plates ‒ what they had done was taken photographs of the sky ‒ had disappeared. And so, nobody could go back and check the original data. At some point, subsequently, they kind of reappeared inside--just recently, actually, inside the personal effects of a British astronomer who had gone to live in Chile. And nobody quite knows how he got a hold of them. And, I actually have to say, I'm not sure what the outcome of this is--whether people have actually gone back and tried to measure this again.
So--and at the time, you know, Eddington, who, in his subsequent life, demonstrated a real propensity for believing his own theories, if you know what I mean--which served him poorly when he was dealing with Chandrasekhar, who was thinking of other things. Eddington had said before he went on the expedition that he was absolutely certain this was going to work because he had studied Einstein's theory and had come to believe it, because it was so beautiful and elegant. And so, there's a famous story where somebody said, well, Mr. Eddington what's--or said to somebody else on the expedition, what will Eddington do if it comes out wrong? And they said, well, Eddington will just go insane.
And so, there's a little bit of suspicion attached to this particular experiment. However, subsequent to that this has been measured repeatedly, many times, during many eclipses, and it's very clear that this works. And as I said, there's now evidence from other astronomical objects for the deflection of light, all of which confirms Einstein's theory. Yes?
Student: What does the second line say?
Professor Charles Bailyn: What does the second line say? Let's see, eclipse expedition, scientists and international, universal quest, science works as advertised, maybe. That's what I was trying to write down. So, that's the second post-Newtonian test. And the fact that it works in 1919 is what makes people really believe relativity, and what makes people believe that Einstein's this intense genius.
Chapter 4. Gravitational Redshift [00:31:31]
Okay, there are a couple of other post-Newtonian effects. So here's, now, post-Newtonian effect number three. And this is something called the gravitational redshift. You've heard of a redshift. Redshifts and blueshifts. They come about because of the Doppler shift. Something moves towards you, its light gets shifted to the blue. Something moves away from you, its light gets shifted to the red. Turns out, the wavelengths of light also change due to gravity. Or due to being emitted in a curved space-time, if you want to use the relativistic formulation.
Basically, here's how it works. You have some object with radius R, mass M, and you have a light source on the surface of that object. And you look at it from a distance. You're out here at infinity watching this light. And the light, if you emit green light here, by the time it reaches you, it'll have shifted into the red. And there's an equation. Let me write down the equation. So, this is delta lambda [Δλ]--oops, that one's not working anymore. Δλ over λ0. That's the shift in light.
And remember that the Doppler shift has some equation, here. Well, here's the equation for this shift, due to the gravitation of an object. RS / r, where this is the distance to the given mass. Or if you're emitting light from the surface of an object, the distance to the mass is the distance to the center of the object. So, in this particular case it would be the radius of the object, minus 1. So, you can see that if there's no mass, then the Schwarzschild radius is zero, and this is 1 - 1, and there's no shift.
Okay, now why does this happen? This has to happen. Imagine that you're standing on the surface of an object and you throw an object up into the air. I have an object here. I'm going to do this. What will happen? As I throw it up into the air, it's going to slow down. If I throw it faster than the escape velocity and I don't have a ceiling and stuff, then it'll go--it'll keep going away forever, but it will, nevertheless, slow down. If I throw it up slower than the escape velocity, then it's going to rise to some height, stop, turn around and fall back. Right? So, that's what happens with an object.
Why is this happening? The reason it happens is because as it moves--as it tries to move away from the Earth, it has to lose energy, because it's pushing its way out of the gravitational field. And so, it gradually slows down, because its kinetic energy decreases, as it goes further away, to balance the change in the potential energy, for those of you who remember high school physics. It balances the change in potential energy, so the total energy is zero. And so, the kinetic energy has to slow down. And whether it slows down enough to stop it or not depends on whether it's moving faster than its escape velocity or not.
Supposing I do this with a flashlight. And instead of throwing a keychain up in the air, I throw a photon up in the air. The photon starts out at the speed of light. Now, that, too, has to lose energy as it moves away from the Earth. But light, as we know, always travels at the speed of light. It doesn't slow down. It can't slow down. So, what it has to do is, it has to lose energy in some other way.
And the trick is that the energy of a photon is equal to a couple of constants, h times c, over the wavelength. So, as the energy gets less, the wavelength gets longer--has to get bigger. And so, what is happening here is, as you shine light off a gravitating object, as it gets further and further away from the object, it loses energy. But it loses energy not by slowing down, as an ordinary mass of objects would, but by changing its wavelength.
And now, go back and look at this equation again. Supposing you're shining your flashlight from the event horizon of a black hole--from something where the distance to the object is equal to the Schwarzschild radius. Then, you get Δλ equals infinity. And you've redshifted your way out to an infinitely large wavelength. The consequence of that is that the energy of the light is equal to zero.
And so, this is how it happens that light can't escape from a black hole. Because, you know, if you have the Newtonian vision of the escape velocity in mind--the thing goes up, stops, turns around and comes back--and you imagine shining a flashlight from inside the event horizon of a black hole, you imagine that the light would go up, stop, turn around and fall back. But light doesn't do that, because light always goes at the speed of light. So, what happens instead is, it redshifts itself out of existence altogether. And so, that's the way light is prevented from leaving a black hole. Because if you shine from either inside, or at, the event horizon, it'll redshift itself to infinity. Yeah?
Student: Everything you just said still makes perfect sense in the context of the Newtonian concept, why do we need to [Inaudible]
Professor Charles Bailyn: Okay, so there is a Newtonian version of this. You can imagine how you expand this thing. But this particular equation is relativistic. Oh, the other thing is that, of course, in Newtonian physics, there's no reason for light not to slow down. This business that light always goes at the speed of light, regardless of the observer, is a relativistic effect. So, you know, if you take a photon and throw it in the air, in a Newtonian concept, there's no reason it can't slow down and turn around and come back. Yes? Yeah?
Student: [Inaudible]
Professor Charles Bailyn: Δλ over λ. Δλ over λ.
Student: Sorry, next page.
Professor Charles Bailyn: This?
Student: [Inaudible]
Professor Charles Bailyn: Okay, so this is speed of light -
Student: Yeah.
Professor Charles Bailyn: And this is another famous constant called Planck's Constant. I don't think we're going to use that equation for anything in particular. But it's a couple of constants. So, basically, the energy is proportional to 1 / λ.
Student: Okay.
Professor Charles Bailyn: Yeah. Other questions? Okay. If you turn it around--if you sit on the surface of, I don't know, a neutron star or something, and look at distant starlight, that light will pick up energy as it comes towards you. So, if you sit on a gravitating object and look at a distant light, that light will actually be blueshifted, because it will gain energy falling down toward you. And so, while this is always referred to as the gravitational redshift, because we're always imagining that we're some distant observer in a flat space looking at some gravitating object, in principle, if you could live on a neutron star, all the stars would look bluer than they do to us because of this effect. So, it works both ways.
This, by the way, has now been tested in the laboratory. Here's how you do it. You set up--you sit on top of a ladder and you look at light coming from the surface and coming up toward you. And then, you have somebody--you have some confederate, or graduate student, or something, who sits on the ground and looks at light coming sideways. And you determine that the wavelength detected here is slightly larger than the wavelength detected here. That's a really small effect, because the Earth's gravitational field--you know, if you do this little calculation and you try and figure out RS / r for the surface of the Earth, it's a really, really small difference from 1. Nevertheless, because you're in the laboratory and we know how to measure the wavelengths of light with incredible accuracy, this effect can actually be measured in the lab, and has been. Yes?
Student: So, if you're on a black hole or whatever, shining a light upward and instead of doing the arc thing just--see through the--stretches out and winks out of existence at the top, then winks back into existence, falls back?
Professor Charles Bailyn: Well, it can't fall back, right. It can't fall back because it can't stop, turn around and come back.
Student: So, it just winks out of existence up here?
Professor Charles Bailyn: Well, notice what happens. Supposing you go from the event horizon only to slightly above the event horizon. The difference in the wavelength you see is this quantity at the event horizon, minus this quantity a little bit above the event horizon, because it's still going to be redshifted. But this is infinite at the event horizon. So, by the time it moves even a tiny bit off the event horizon, it's already gone.
Student: Okay.
Professor Charles Bailyn: Yeah, it's because this goes--this term becomes infinity large. Oh, but I should say, this brings up a good point. Supposing you're here and it's not a black hole. So, it's not going to--it's not going to be disastrous. But you're observing it, not at infinity, but close. So here's--this is at some R, and this is at R1 a little bit further away. So, what you would observe, here, is Δλ / λ = Δλ at R1 minus Δ--let me write this so that there's some hope of reading it.
So, this gives you the Δλ you observe at R1, over λ0, is equal to Δλ at R1, calculated by that formula, minus Δλ at R. Because, it redshifts a little bit from here to here. It would redshift more from here out to infinity. And so, the way you calculate that is you calculate redshift from here to infinity, minus redshift from here to infinity. And since--for something that is at the event horizon, the redshift from there to infinity is infinite, even if you're observing it just a little bit higher, it's already gone.
Student: Okay.
Professor Charles Bailyn: Does that make sense? How are we doing? Other questions? Yes?
Student: [Inaudible]
Professor Charles Bailyn: Oh, the photons, remember--there's a relationship between the whole way wave particle duality works for photons. There's a relationship between the energy of the photon and the wavelength. That was this E= hc / λ thing. So, as the wavelength becomes infinite, the energy in that photon goes to zero. So, it's still a photon. But if you've got a photon with zero energy, you're not going to notice it. Yes?
Student: Just as we, like, you know, use the gravitational field of, like, Mercury, Jupiter, or whatever to kind of slingshot probes into outer space, could light, like, pick up the energy by, like, you know, going around massive objects?
Professor Charles Bailyn: Well, light picks up energy as it falls towards a massive object. That's the inverse gravitational redshift[cp]. You sit on the gravitating object. You watch light coming at you from a distance. So, it does that. That slingshot effect only works if you add energy to the thing and kick yourself back out of orbit at just the right moment. You can't do that with light, because you can't give it extra--you can't give it an extra velocity kick, at any moment, to push it back out. But it is true, that if you sit--you can do this experiment backwards, right? You have your light source up here, and you observe it from down here, and then you'll see it blueshifted.
Chapter 5. Gravitational Waves [00:45:14]
Other questions? How are we doing? Okay. Let me mention one last post-Newtonian effect. This is post-Newtonian effect number four. This is the existence of gravitational waves. And the way this works is--let me put these over here. Remember the bed sheet and the basketball, over here, from a few days ago? All right, now, imagine that that basketball, which is some massive object, is moving back and forth on the--it's orbiting some other thing on that bed sheet. What will happen? Well, the bed sheet will ripple in different ways as the thing moves around. And this creates, essentially, a wave of distortions of space-time that propagates outward, as it turns out, at the speed of light.
So, the way this works is, as a mass moves back and forth--perhaps because it's in orbit, or for some other reason--it generates ripples in space-time. These propagate outward at the speed of light. And we'll talk later, maybe, about how one--what it means to have a ripple in space-time, and how one might detect it. But there's a more immediate effect, which is that the energy in these so-called gravitational waves--they carry energy with them. And the energy comes from--is extracted from the orbit of the object that's moving back and forth.
So, the orbit gradually loses energy. And that means that the orbit gets smaller, gradually. So, the orbit gets gradually smaller. And so, in the Newtonian approximation[cq], things stay in orbit and they're perfectly stable forever and ever, and they just go orbiting around, and around, and around. But, in general relativity, there's a gradual, slow loss of energy, and objects will gradually spiral in.
Now, this happens really slowly. It has not been detected in the Solar System. That is to say, even the orbit of Mercury, we can't measure its orbital period accurately enough to see this slow down. Certainly all the planets in the Solar System have been happily going in their orbits for four-and-a-half billion years with no sign of this effect. But you can see this in certain kinds of binary stars. Stars which happen to have very short orbits. And in particular, there's something called the binary pulsar. Pulsar is a kind of neutron star. And these gravitational wave effects, the gradual decrease in the orbit, has been observed in binary pulsars[cr]. And we'll talk about that, I guess, next time.
[end of transcript]
ASTR 160 - Lecture 14 - Pulsars
Chapter 1. Review of Post-newtonian Effects [cs]of General Relativity [00:00:00]
Professor Charles Bailyn: I've been talking about general relativity, and in particular, the post-Newtonian, relativistic effects. These are the first things that happen as the gravitational field becomes strong enough that Newton's laws don't perfectly apply. And let me just summarize those, because we're going to see them all in action in just a minute.
So, here are the post-Newtonian effects of general relativity. And the first of them is the precession of the perihelion. I'm just going to list these. And this was seen in the nineteenth century already, and correctly interpreted by Einstein. It had to do with Mercury's orbit.
I should say, this word, perihelion, that means closest approach to the Sun. And so, that only applies for planets if you have the same--you can have the same kind of effect in binary stars or in other things, in which case, you might--they call it a periastron. That's the closest approach to a star that isn't the Sun. Or, here's a favorite word of mine: perigalacticon, I like that one. That's the closest approach to a galaxy. You can have--the other side of the orbit that is 180 degrees away from the perigalacticon, that's called the anti-perigalacticon. And you are challenged to use that in a sentence at any time over break. Anyone who successfully does that, send me an email recounting the circumstances, and I'll give you an extra point or something.
All right, so, precession of the perihelion, that's one post-Newtonian effect. Another post-Newtonian effect is the deflection of light by mass, just because mass curves space-time, and so, light will follow a curved path also. This was first demonstrated in 1919 by the famous eclipse observations of Eddington. And it also has been manifested recently in the discovery of so-called gravitational lenses, of various kinds, in which the appearance of an object is distorted by the fact that the light from that object has to pass by some other mass on its way to your eye.
And so, I have a couple examples, here, which I'd like to show you of gravitational lenses. This is the famous Einstein cross, so-called. And what this is, this is just a picture, I think, from the Hubble Space Telescope. And these four objects, here, are the same object. That's a quasar. It's just, for this purpose, a point of light in the sky. But it's located--its true location is behind this thing. This is much closer to you than any of these guys. This is a galaxy about partway between us and the quasar. And what has happened is, if there were no deflection of light, you'd see this quasar, kind of, right behind the galaxy. And in fact, it would be hard to distinguish between the two. But what has happened is, because there's this galaxy in the way, the light from the quasar starts coming this way and then bends around the galaxy and comes back toward us. And the same is true up here and down here, and down here.
And so, you get four different images of this quasar--of the same quasar. And they know it's the same quasar, because they've taken spectra of the thing, and it's the exact same spectrum on all four of these things. And so, these are just four different images of the same object. And the reason they're not symmetrically distributed, here, is because the mass in this galaxy is not symmetrically distributed. And so, depending on what path you take, you get different amounts of deflections. So, that's a classic example of gravitational lens. Yes?
Student: Why can't we also see this quasar in the middle?
Professor Charles Bailyn: In principle, you could see it, right through here, but there are two things about the path that comes right at us. There are two problems with that. One is that for various--these guys are all magnified, and the one that comes through the middle is demagnified. Second of all, it's right in back of the galaxy. But, in principle, there's a fifth one down in the middle, that's true. Yes?
Student: [Inaudible]
Professor Charles Bailyn: Sorry?
Student: [Inaudible]
Professor Charles Bailyn: Okay, so what--let me, let me pause, here, and tell you what a quasar is. A quasar is a quasi-stellar object. What it is, is, it's a very bright source right in the middle of a galaxy. And so, it's actually a point source of light. It looks like a star. These things turns out to be--what they really are, it turns out, are massive black holes in the center of galaxies, accreting material from the galaxy itself. But they appear to be very bright nuclei of galaxies and if you could look really hard, you could see the galaxy--the background galaxy around this thing. But in this particular case, it's way too faint to see. The galaxy has a much larger extent, because it's all the stars and all the stuff in the galaxies. It's not coming right from the middle. And this one's much closer than those, and so, you can actually see that it's extended, in this case. Yes?
Student: [Inaudible]
Professor Charles Bailyn: Oh, it's not the black hole that's emitting the light. It's the material falling into the black hole that gets heated up. I'll actually talk about this on Thursday a little bit.
Chapter 2. Gravitational Lensing[ct] [00:06:15]
Other questions about the Einstein cross, here? Let me show you another one. So, this is a Hubble Space Telescope picture of a cluster of galaxies. See all these different things, all these extended sources, those are all individual galaxies. Galaxies, it turns out, come in clusters. And so, here is a big bunch of galaxies.
And some of the galaxies you see here--most of the galaxies, all these big ones, are part of this cluster. This is a cluster that's relatively nearby to Earth. But some of the galaxies are actually not in the cluster. They're much, much further away. They're in back of the cluster. And these things--these, sort of, streaky things you see all over the place here--what these are, are galaxies that are in back of the cluster of galaxies, whose light has been lensed when it passes through the cluster of galaxies. And it's been stretched.
It's because, what happened is, this thing here, for example, ought to be a tiny little galaxy that you can barely see here, except the light from the top end of that galaxy got bent up to here. And the light from the bottom end of that galaxy got bent down to here. And that's why they're all sort of in this kind of--all these things are kind of circular around the center of this thing, because this is a very, very massive galaxy. And that's the thing that's doing the lensing. And so, it effectively distorts the shape of the background galaxy. And you can see a couple more of them around this massive galaxy, here.
These are pretty, but they also can be used in order to understand the distribution of mass inside the galaxy cluster. Because the particular way in which these galaxies are distorted depends on how much mass there is in this galaxy cluster, and how that mass is distributed. And so, these are used to study the mass distributions of galaxy clusters. And so, this is a different kind of gravitational lensing.
And finally, let me show you a joke. This is a picture of The Smithsonian Institute in Washington, D.C., where there are a group--well, actually, The Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory is actually in Cambridge, Massachusetts. And there, there are a group of people who study gravitational lensing. And they have taken this picture. And imagine what it would look like if, about halfway between where you're looking and this building, there were a black hole the mass of Saturn. And here's what it looks like. And all these distortions are simply due to the change in direction caused by the gravitational force of this imaginary black hole. And so, you could see what happens. The black hole is, sort of, right down the middle, here. And so, off at the edges, there's only a little bit of distortion. And then, in the middle, everything goes haywire.
Let me take this back a notch. Take a look at these two central towers, this one, here, and that one. And so, they're kind of--what's happened, here, is that you're seeing light that has gone out and then been bent back towards you, so, it looks like the tower's over here. But look, that same tower is down here. And so, that's light from the tower that went down and underneath the black hole and then got pulled back up to reach your eye. So, there are two paths from that tower to your eye, and you can see both of them.
Look at this thing here. What's that? Let me go back to the original picture. That's this statue. And what's happened is, light from the top of the statue has gone up and over the black hole, and come down towards you. Whoops--and so, here it is. And similarly, the clouds that were up here have been bent down--have gone underneath the black hole and been bent back up, so you can see them here.
And so, they worked out all the distortions of this, and so, they like to show this kind of amusing picture. They actually had a movie, which I couldn't find on the Net, last night, which is too bad, where they take the black hole, and they kind of move it across the front of this thing. You can see all the distortions coming out. And so, you can have enormous fun with this kind of thing. Needless to say, this is not--this particular picture has not ever actually been observed. That's calculated, not actually observed. But, you can see the kinds of bizarre effects that gravitational lensing can create. And, as I mentioned, in some cases, these are scientifically useful things, because you can determine the distribution of the mass that's causing the lensing. Questions? Yes?
Student: So in that particular case it's always [Inaudible] that all the light from the other side get lensed?
Professor Charles Bailyn: Well, what you have to do--it depends a little bit on the exact mass distribution of the lens. In this case, I think they're assuming a point source. And so, it is, in general, true that if there's a gravitational lens, you end up seeing more light than you otherwise would, because it's focused in towards you. So, the total amount of light that you see, if you're seeing a lensed object, is typically larger than the amount you would see in the absence of the lens. So, there are more paths of light that are curved towards you than are curved away from you. If you're standing over on the side, you'll lose a little bit of the light, because it will be curved in some other direction. And so, there are more different way--you can see the thing--you know, it's kind of an early twentieth century art thing. You can see the same object from two different sides at once, and you get these curious distortions. Yes?
Student: If you're looking into a galaxy cluster and there are a lot of streaks and a lot of galaxies and you don't know the mass of the galaxy to try to find the mass [Inaudible]
Professor Charles Bailyn: Yeah.
Student: How do you know what streaks belong to which galaxies?
Professor Charles Bailyn: What streaks belong to which galaxies? Okay. You know that the streaks must come from galaxies that are located behind the galaxy cluster, that are not themselves part of the galaxy cluster. And, in order to understand what that streak is, in principle, you'd need to know the exact shape and size of that galaxy. You can go and take a spectrum of the thing and figure out how far away it is and what the relative distances are. But, in principle, you would need to know the exact shape of that galaxy before it was distorted, which you don't know. And so, what you have to do, to interpret these things, is to take many streaks and assume that the galaxies that caused them are kind of normal--a normal distribution of galaxy shapes. And so, it's more of a statistical process than using them one at a time, in that case.
The quasars are a little easier to deal with, because you know that they're points. And this--and there are various kinds of limits to how much information you can get out of this. And it's quite tricky to do.
What's easy to do is the thing that they did in that picture. You imagine that there is a mass in the way, and you figure out what happens to the light from the background. What's hard to do is to observe the light in the background, not know what it ought to look like, really, and infer what the mass distribution is. That's a harder problem. And there's a lot of theoretical effort, at the moment, going into trying to solve that problem of, here's what you see, infer what the mass distribution has to be in order for you to see that. Yes?
Student: Have we ever observed where it was the perfect lensing when you have a ring around [Inaudible]
Professor Charles Bailyn: Yes, there are some Einstein rings. I don't have them here. Hubble Space Telescope has observed a bunch of these things. Typically, they're not full rings, because the mass distribution is not perfectly symmetric. But there are, as you can see, you can see, those were short, kind of, little arcs. And if you get it set up just the right way, the arcs can go a large fraction of the way around the circle. So, these are, kind of, fun things to observe, and also give you useful information. So, that's the second of the post-Newtonian effects. The first was the precession of the perihelion. Now, the deflection of light.
Moving on, number three, here, is what we talked about last time, which is the gravitational redshift. And here, we have delta lambda over lambda [Δ λ/ λ], or alternatively, in the case of the problem set you're working on, the pulse period, in either case--these are usually given the letter Z, that's redshift. That's a definition of this quantity, Z, which is often used. And this is equal to this quantity. And this is the Schwarzschild radius of some mass. And this R is the distance of the light source from that mass.
And what this equation signifies is how much redshift is there, if you observe this thing when you are sitting at infinity--do you observe from infinite distance. And what do I mean by infinite distance? What I mean is that RS / R goes to zero. That's what infinite R means, in this case. So, you're sitting out there a long, long, long way away from any gravitational effect. You're looking at a light that is emitted inside a gravitational field, relatively close to some mass. That light is redshifted by this amount. And pulse periods are also lengthened by the same amount, and I'll come back to that in a minute.
One thing I want to say right now is, what happens if you are an observer and you're not infinitely far away? What happens if you're just a little bit further away than the light source is, or perhaps even if you're closer to the object than the light source is? And, in that case, if the observer is not at infinity, then the observed redshift is equal to the redshift from the source to infinity, which you could calculate by this formula, minus the redshift from the observer to infinity, which you can also calculate with that same formula. So, you have to subtract two things.
Basically, what happens is, imagine the light going from--it starts out at the source, it goes to the observer, and then it keeps going all the way out to infinity. And you want to ask, what does the observer see? The observer sees that portion of the redshift that happens between the source and the observer. So, to figure out what that is, you figure out the redshift from the source to infinity. You figure out the redshift from the observer to infinity. And you subtract those things. And that gives you the redshift from the source to the observer. Okay, yes?
Student: [Inaudible]
Professor Charles Bailyn: No, no, no, but look what happens. When RS / R is equal to zero that means there is no redshift. That means there is no redshift. It doesn't mean that the observed wavelength is zero. It means the change in the wavelength is zero. Yeah, that's important.
And, just to comment on the problem set here, the idea on the second problem of the problem set is, you do have an observer at infinity. So, here's the observer. Here's some neutron star. And you have a light source that can either be on the surface of the neutron star, or it can be raised off the surface of the neutron star. And basically, what you're observing is the change in the light source. So, this has some redshift, some pretty large redshift, because it's sitting on the surface of a neutron star. This, because it's further away from the neutron star, has slightly less redshift. And what you are interested in is the change in the redshift.
And the idea behind the problem is, you want to set this up so that that change in the redshift is the same as the change in the redshift due to the Doppler shift, if this whole thing was in orbit around something. That's the plan of that particular problem.
Okay, so that's the third of the post-Newtonian relativistic effects, and there's a fourth one. The fourth is gravitational waves, which I may have time to come back and talk about in detail. At the moment, though, I just want to say what the effect of these things is, rather than talk in detail about what they are. The effect is that the orbital period decreases. Now, it turns out, this is a relatively small effect, and it is not observed in the Solar System, even in Mercury, which has the strongest relativistic effect.
Chapter 3. Jocelyn Bell, Binary Pulsars, and General Relativity [00:21:05]
Okay. So, those are four post-Newtonian effects of general relativity. And what I want to talk about now is what has become probably the best laboratory for general relativity that we know of. The problem with general relativity is you can't actually study it all that much in the lab, because, in order to study it, you need strong gravitational forces. And it's very difficult to create strong gravitational forces in a laboratory. What would you need to do? You'd need to take some massive object, crush it down to the size of a black hole or something, and have it sit there in your lab. And this is not something that one can do. And so, you have to go and look at astronomical objects in order to find suitable situation in which to study these relativistic effects.
So, the best lab for general relativity--lab for G.R., here, is a set of objects. And one object in particular, which is referred to as the Binary Pulsar. This is discussed in the readings for this week's problem set. The discovery of this particular object led to a Nobel Prize for its discoverers, and that's what's discussed in that article.
So, the first thing to talk about, here, is what is a pulsar? So, pulsars were discovered in the late 1960s by a woman named Jocelyn Bell. And she wired up a whole field in Cambridge, England, to make it behave like a radio telescope, and discovered that there were objects in the sky, celestial objects, that seemed to be emitting pulses of radio waves. So, the observed signature of these things--what was observed is pulses of radio waves. So, you get kind of a blip every few seconds. It goes blip, blip, blip, blip, and so forth. And these pulses come by--so, the pulsations happen once--it's sort of with a period of somewhere between milliseconds and ten seconds. So, they come at you pretty rapidly. Most of them are a few seconds or maybe a fraction of a second. So, these things are blipping away.
And they had no idea what these were. And the first four of them they gave the nickname LGM1, LGM2, LGM3, LGM4, for "little green men," because the thought was that these might actually--they thought, briefly, that these might be signals from some extraterrestrial intelligence, because, you know, it's a very regular signal. It's hard to imagine how those could have been created. But, fortunately, before they published their paper, somebody suggested a better solution, which turns out to be correct. That what these things are, are rotating magnetized neutron stars. And this was the first direct evidence that neutron stars existed.
And the reason they thought they were neutron stars is because the speed with which these things pulsed is supposed to be reflected in the rotation of these neutron stars. And something that rotates ten times a second had better be pretty small. And so, there was strong size limits on the neutron stars. It's not going to matter, too much, exactly what these things are, but I'm going to explain it to you anyway. But don't worry too much about it. For the purposes of relativity, the key point, here, is that it's an extremely accurate clock--that you get these blips coming out of the thing, and that creates a very accurate clock. And then, you can see very small changes in the pulse rate of these things.
Chapter 4. Measurement Errors and Testing Strong Field Relativity [00:25:16]
So, now let me just briefly tell you what these are. Oh, I should mention--so, the discovery of neutron stars, this was a very big deal. This was the first strongly relativistic object that had ever been discovered and they awarded a Nobel Prize to Jocelyn Bell's thesis supervisor. And there is some feeling among some folks that this was an injustice. And so, there is--people discuss the story of Jocelyn Bell and the discovery of pulsars. To her credit, Bell has never complained. Bell and the discovery of pulsar--
Student: Did the thesis advisor do anything?
Professor Charles Bailyn: Oh yes, well that's actually an interesting question. The question is, "Did the thesis advisor do anything?" As a thesis advisor myself, I take that question seriously. Well, this is the whole debate about who should have gotten the Nobel Prize. The thesis supervisor thought up the experiment, and Bell did it. So, who ought to get the credit for that? It's actually a subtle question, and it bears on problem four, or whatever it is, of this week's homework, so it's worth thinking about.
Jocelyn Bell and the discovery of pulsars--he also got the money. That's not trivial sometimes. And the moral of the story--it depends on who you ask, for exactly the reason that you bring up. One moral of the story is that grad students, particularly female grad students, never get any credit and that this is a great injustice. As you get older, your attitude towards this problem changes.
And the alternative moral is that thinking and doing are not the same, and that thinking is better than doing. Now, one could raise various objections, and people have, to this line of thought. And interestingly enough, the next time they had to give a Nobel Prize for something to do with pulsars, which was the discovery of the Binary Pulsar, they did give the prize also to the graduate student. And it's the graduate student's description of what he did that you're actually reading for this problem set. So, you can opine on this topic yourselves on the problem set. Anyway, a matter of continuing controversy in scientific circles.
But let me just briefly show you what's supposed to be happening, here. Here is a neutron star--very dense thing, yeah? And it's rotating, so, it's got some axis of rotation, here--a different color. So, here's its axis of rotation. And it's rotating around its axis.
And it's also got a magnetic field. But the magnetic field, the pole of the magnetic field, is not the same as the rotation pole. That's true on the Earth as well. Magnetic north is not exactly in the same place as true North, the center of the Earth's rotation. And if you're in northern Canada and you try and follow a compass signal north, you're going to get yourself into big trouble. Because, you know, the actual magnetic pole is somewhere in northern Canada, and if you're north of that, you'll be going south when you think you're going north.
Anyway, imagine that here's the magnetic field. Magnetic fields have these sort of field lines that look like this. And what happens in these things is that there's radio emission coming out of the magnetic poles. So, there's radio emission coming out this way. And so, if you're observing this from here, say, you see radio emission when the pole is pointing towards you. But then, if the thing is rotating, then half a rotation later--so, later, but not too much later, because this thing rotates really quickly. Here's the neutron star, still, and now the pole's over here, because it's rotated around by a factor of two, by half a rotation. So, now the radio emission's coming this way. And if you're still sitting observing the thing down here, you don't see anything. So this is on, and this is off. So, you watch this pole.
It's sort of like a lighthouse, you know. A lighthouse has a beam of light. And when it's pointing towards you, you see light. And then, as it's going around in a circle, you don't see light. Then it points towards you--you see light again. And so, the consequence of this is that you get something that looks--if you plot radio emission versus time, you get these very regularly spaced blips. And it is the time between one blip and the next that's the pulse period.
And so, for our purposes here--I mean, pulsars are very interesting objects, but we're not going to go into them in any depth. As objects, the key thing is that it's got this really accurate clock on it. And if you imagine a pulsar in orbit around something, when it comes towards you, each one of these blips happens a little closer to you. So, the light travel time from the blip to you is less. And so, it seems like the blips happen closer together, because each one of them has emitted a little closer towards you. Similarly, when it's going away, each blip is emitted a little further away. It takes extra time to get to you, and the pulse period, the length of time between the pulses, appears to be longer. By how much? By exactly the amount that the Doppler shift formula would suggest. And so, the pulse period obeys the same rules in terms of its length as wavelengths of light do. Okay.
So, for example, it is true that Δ pulse period over pulse period is equal to the usual Doppler shift formula, which is approximately equal to VR / c, in the Newtonian approximation. Oh, and I should say, in problem one on the problem set, you can use the Newtonian approximation, because, as you'll discover, the velocity of the object as it goes around in its orbit is significantly less than the speed of light.
Okay. So, they discover this Binary Pulsar with a short orbital period. The orbital period--this is now the orbital period--is around eight hours, which is pretty short, but it's still not very relativistic. But you can measure these things to incredible accuracy. So, you cannot only see the velocity curve that we're used to. You can also see tiny deviations from the Newtonian velocity curve. And from those tiny deviations from the Newtonian velocity curve, you can see these post-Newtonian effects.
In particular, it turns out--so this in an elliptical orbit. It's not a circular orbit. It's a highly elliptical orbit. And you can see the precession of the periastron as the ellipticity--as the direction of the orbit, as the position of the orbit, changes, you can see the precession of the periastron. And the precession of the periastron happens at the rate of four degrees per year. Now, compare that to Mercury, in which the same effect can be observed at 43 arc seconds per century. So, this is a much stronger effect.
Okay. You can also see the gravitational redshift. Now, let me show you how this comes about. But you have to be careful about exactly what you're seeing. You're not seeing the gravitational redshift, due to the fact that the clock is sitting on a neutron star. Because, okay, you're seeing the effect of the companion object of this other object in the system, which happens to be also a neutron star, but not a pulsar.
And what happens is this. Here's your clock, and it's going around in some kind of elliptical orbit. Here's the center of mass. Here's the other; so, there's a clock that's going around like this. And then, there's some other object that's going around like this. They're approximately the same mass. And so, sometimes these objects are close to each other. For example, here--when they're here and here, this is--call this position 1. And then, later on, half an orbit later, they're out here in position 2, and this one's gone all the way out to here.
So, at position 1, the objects are close, and so, the clock is redshifted by the presence of the other object. And so, it has to--there's a redshift due to the other object, which is nearby. Objects are close, so, the redshift caused by the other object is large. At position 2 the distance to the other object is much greater--distance is greater. And so, redshift is less.
Now, it's also true that there's a redshift caused by the fact that this clock is sitting on neutron star. But the thing about that redshift is it doesn't change during the course of the orbit. So, you can't actually tell that it's there. Because that's one of the differences between measuring pulse periods of pulsars and measuring wavelengths of light. With these spectral features in light, you know what it's supposed to be if it isn't redshifted.
In the case of the pulsars you don't know, in advance, what the pulse period ought to be. So, you can't tell what it should be if there was no gravitational field or was no Doppler shift. All that you can tell is the amount by which it changes during the course of an orbital period. And so, you're comparing the redshift when the objects are in this position to the redshift of the objects in this position. The redshift caused by the pulsar itself doesn't change, but the redshift caused by where its companion is, and the gravitational force exerted by the companion, does change.
The consequence, by the way, is that if these things are in a circular orbit, you can't see the gravitational redshift, because they're always the same distance away from each other, and the gravitational redshift doesn't change. There is a gravitational redshift, but it doesn't change during the course of the period, and it's the change that you can observe. Yes?
Student: So, in this case, redshift refers not to the frequency of, like, the light in the pulses? It refers to the [Inaudible]
Professor Charles Bailyn: It's the time between pulses. Yeah. You could imagine that the pulses might have a spectral feature and then you would see it in the spectral feature, too. In fact, that's extremely hard to have that. That doesn't happen. It's a continuum of light. So it's the time--what you observe is the time between pulses. And that can be observed extremely accurately. You get 20 decimal places of accuracy. It's really kind of frightening. Yes?
Student: [Inaudible]
Professor Charles Bailyn: Well, if it's a circular orbit, no. If there's a circular orbit, they're always the same distance around each other. They're chasing each other around in a circle. That's what it means to be circular orbit, if every point on the orbit is the same distance to the center for both objects. So, each object is the same distance from the center of mass at all times. That's what makes it a circular orbit. And they're always on the opposite side of the center of mass, so, the distance between them is always the same for a circular orbit.
I'll draw it. Here we go. Here's the center of mass, supposing these objects are the same mass as each other. Here's one of them, it's going around this way and here it is right now. And here's the other object, it's going around this way, and here it is right now. And they're just going to march around this circle, each being on the opposite side of the center and the distance between them won't change.
Student: [Inaudible]
Professor Charles Bailyn: Oh, they only overlap if the two objects are the same mass. So, if one object is more massive than the other, then you've got a little circle going this way and a big circle going this way. Let's see, it would have to be there. And then, they're still the same distance from each other at every point along the way. Because each one of them is always the same distance from the center of mass, in the middle, and they're always on opposite sides.
Student: [Inaudible]
Professor Charles Bailyn: So, the way ellipses work is--so, here's an ellipse. And the ellipse can be big or little--here's an ellipse. They're doing ellipses, and the center of mass is at one focus of the ellipse. It's not at the center of the ellipse. That's the key thing. And so, when you're furthest away from the focus, you have a long distance from the center. When you're closer, you're closer. And it's because, each one of these things, you don't maintain a constant distance from the center of mass.
Okay, so, because of this effect in elliptical orbits, in Binary Pulsars, in elliptical orbits, you can observe the gravitational redshift. Also ‒ and this is what they got the Nobel Prize for, really ‒ you can see that the orbital period decreases. It's getting shorter. The two objects are spiraling in together. Decreases due to gravitational waves.
So, you can observe three different post-Newtonian effects in these systems. So, this constitutes a serious test of general relativity in the following way. If you could do only Newtonian measurements, what would you get? Well, we did this before, for the planets. What you can get out of a Newtonian measurement of velocity--remember, what you're doing is you're measuring the Doppler shift; you're measuring radial velocity. What you get is, you can determine Mtotal, the total mass of the system, if you know the inclination. That's something we tended to leave out. We always claim these things are edge-on because it makes the calculations easier. But, in fact, you get a different answer depending on what the inclination is, and you don't necessarily know the inclination.
So, if you now measure the precession of the periastron, then this also--the amount of that also depends on M1, M2, the two masses, and the inclination. So, you can solve for the inclination now. This isn't actually precisely how you do it, but conceptually, this is how it works. You now solve for the inclination. You then know Mtotal, but not each individual mass.
Student: [Inaudible]
Professor Charles Bailyn: M1, M2 and the inclination, this is i. But you don't know the individual masses. Now, if both objects were pulsars and you could see both orbits, then you would also know the individual masses. But you don't. You only see one of these objects. Okay.
So, now, the next effect is gravitational redshift. And this, again, depends, in a different way, on M1, M2, and the inclination. And so, now you can solve for M1. And since you know the total mass, you also get M2. So, at this point you know M1, M2 and the inclination.
What's happening here is that each time you measure an effect, you get an additional constraint. And you started out having three unknowns and one equation. And, of course, you can't solve for three unknowns with only one equation. But then, you observe two more effects. So, now, you have three unknowns and three equations. So, now, you can solve for all of these things.
Now you know everything. At this point you can predict what the period change should be, because you know everything. Then you can measure that. And so, you have a specific prediction created from general relativity. You can measure this effect, and the prediction turns out to be correct, to within the measurement errors.
And the measurement errors are getting more precise all the time, because as time goes on the amount of change in the period, since they first observe it, increases. Because the period's changing more, it's slowing down and the period's getting faster and faster, the objects are falling in. And so, over time that change mounts up. You can measure it better and better and better as time goes on. And so, the precision of this test of general relativity is going up all the time.
So, it is now clear that general relativity is correct, to some number of decimal places. I'm going to put correct in quotes, because it depends how accurately you can measure it, but the accuracy is going up all the time--in the post-Newtonian approximation. Remember, all these effects are post-Newtonian only. Actually, they've now observed a couple of post-post-Newtonian effects, which are the next term in the series expansion. And those are also correct, but they're not measured as precisely yet. So, it's clear that general relativity is correct as long as everything is still pretty close to the Newtonian thing. You can actually still have orbits.
But you could imagine a theory which is like Newton in the first term of the expansion, like general relativity in the second term, the post-Newtonian term, but different in very strong gravitational fields. So, you've got to get the first term to work, and it's got to come out like Newton. You've got to get the second term to work. It's got to come out like general relativity. But then, you can imagine all sorts of different functions that work with this, work with this, and are different in the higher order terms. And the higher order terms are the things that give rise to all these exciting effects, like event horizons, and things like that.
So, what would be nice--it would be good to have some way of testing strong field effects. And by that, I mean, situations in which the Schwarzschild radius over r becomes close to 1. Because, in that case, all the terms in this series expansion, contribute. And, if you can get it--if the theory is right there, then all the terms have to be the same, and you don't have this nagging doubt about whether you could come up with some theory that looks like Newton, in the same way that general relativity looks like Newton, but is different once you get higher order terms. Looks like general relativity in the second term, but turns out to be a totally different theory.
Needless to say, the theorists have come up with, literally, an infinite number of such theories. Because there's a whole infinite family of things which satisfy this, satisfy this, and look different at the upper level. So, what we're going to talk about next time is how one might go about testing strong field relativity. This is a subject close to my heart because it's what I do for a living, and we'll talk about it on Thursday.
[end of transcript]
ASTR 160 - Lecture 15 - Supermassive Black Holes
Chapter 1. Supermassive Black Holes and Gravitational Waves [00:00:00]
Professor Charles Bailyn: Okay, this is the last class of the section on black holes and relativity. I should say, this particular section of the course has gone in a direction I didn't quite expect. We've done a little more--gone a little more deeply into the theory. We haven't done quite as much on actual observed objects. That's not such a terrible thing. I'm quite happy with that. I just want to point out a couple of things that were on the syllabus that we didn't get to, because they're very interesting things. You can look them up on the little black hole website and find out all sorts of things about them.
And one of them is, there exists a category of what's called supermassive black holes. I mentioned the black holes that come from stars, and I'll talk about that much more today. But I don't think I'm going to have a chance to talk about the supermassive black holes. These are black holes that live in the centers of galaxies and can have masses of hundreds of thousands, millions, sometimes even billions of times the mass of the Sun. So, very massive black holes in the centers of galaxies--including our own galaxy, by the way.
And it is gas falling into these black holes that powers the quasars. We saw a gravitationally lensed quasar the other day. These are very powerful sources of emission that are located in the centers of galaxies, sometimes called active galactic nuclei, and they're caused by these very massive black holes. So, that's one thing we're probably not going to get to.
Another thing is, I had originally intended to talk a little bit about gravitational waves. I mentioned that in the context of the fact that the emission of these waves causes the orbital periods of things like the binary pulsar, and indeed all orbits, in principle, to gradually becomes shorter. The orbital period, the semi-major axis, gradually becomes shorter. But there's also the hope--it hasn't yet been done--that you could detect these waves directly, that you could make a kind of telescope that would actually observe gravitational waves. This is now in progress. It hasn't yet succeeded. So, these can, in principle, be directly detected. That hasn't been done yet, but it will be soon, I think.
There's something called the Laser Interferometer Gravity Observatory, abbreviated LIGO, which is basically a kilometer-long hunk of metal, the length of which can be measured to some fraction of the size of an atom. And when a gravitational wave rolls over this, what you expect to happen is you should see the thing getting slightly longer and slightly shorter as the wave goes over it. The problem with this is that the effect of passing trucks on highways ten miles away is many, many times greater than the effect of passing gravitational waves. And so, what they've done is they've built two of these things, one in Washington State and one in Louisiana. And the plan is to operate them simultaneously, so that you can see, things that happen in both places might be attributable to some cosmic source.
There's a whole bunch of other stuff to talk about this. It's a fabulous experiment, and as I say, we probably won't get a chance to talk about it in detail. But you can go to the black hole website, and that has links to all sorts of other things. And you may--if they succeed in this, somebody's winning the Nobel Prize, and so, you may find out about it by reading it in the paper five years from now, or so. Yes?
Student: So--I'm sorry--you mentioned supermassive black holes. Have you ever directly observed them?
Professor Charles Bailyn: Have we ever directly observed a supermassive black hole? It depends what you mean by "directly observe." By definition, you can't directly observe a black hole. We infer their presence in almost exactly the same way that we infer the presence of the small black holes, which I'm going to talk about now; namely, by watching things orbit around them. And so, basically what you--for example, in the center of our own galaxy, there's a one--I think 1 million, 3 million, I don't remember, some number of millions of solar masses of stuff right at the center of the galaxy. You can tell that because the orbits of the stars closest in, which emits no radiation at all. And so, there's something down there that's extremely massive and totally dark. And we know that that's true by watching the orbits of nearby stars.
And we can actually carry out this same kind of observation in the centers of other galaxies. And as far as we can tell, there's one of these supermassive black holes in the middle of every significant galaxy. And that's actually been one of the achievements of this kind of astronomy over the past dozen years, or so--is to demonstrate in each case, for which we have enough data, there seems to be an extremely massive invisible something, down in the middle of these things. And there are other reasons to think that they're actually black holes, rather than, you know, a hundred million neutron stars, or something silly like that. And so, we're pretty much convinced, by now, that these things live in the centers of galaxies, and we're quite convinced that there's one in the middle of our own galaxy. Yes?
Student: Why are they in the middle of all the galaxies?
Professor Charles Bailyn: Why are they in the middle of all the galaxies? This is actually a little bit of a mystery. How these things get made is not clear. It's pretty clear how the stellar mass, the ten solar mass ones, get made. It's the collapse of a single star. How these things build up, how they grow, where they came from in the first place, is a little less clear than it is for the stellar mass thing.
There is recent work which suggests that the very first generation of stars was quite massive, thousands of solar masses, rather than stars of one solar mass, or something like that. And maybe this first generation of stars collapsed down into thousand mass black holes, and then a whole bunch of them ran into each other and fell into the centers of galaxies. But I would have to say that it isn't entirely clear where these supermassive things come from. In contrast to the situation with ten solar mass black holes, where we have, if not a detailed theory, at least, a good handle on the broad story of where they come from.
Chapter 2. Strong-Field Relativity[cu] [00:07:15]
Okay. So, that's what we're not going to talk about. So, now, let me talk about what we are going to talk about. Sort of a meta-lecture, I guess. Let's see, last time I talked about the Binary Pulsar. And that was an example of a very detailed test of post-Newtonian relativity. And what I want to talk about now is strong-field relativity. Relativistic effects[cv] that have nothing to do with Newtonian theory, that are totally different, and then, happen when you're really, very close to an event horizon, or in some other kind of drastic situation.
So, here's the plan, here's how you would--how would you go about testing the predictions of strong-field relativity? Well, the first thing you'd want to do is find a black hole. Not just talk about them but, you know, be able to point in the sky to where one of them is. And then, you'd like to study it and find out whether this thing you think is a black hole actually behaves as general relativity would predict for such an object. And, in particular, there's this very strong prediction from relativity that such a thing would not have a surface. That it would have an event horizon down which things would disappear--not a surface of any kind. And so, what I want to talk about today is both of these steps.
And, the story starts in the late 1960s, in the middle of the 1960s, when the first x-ray-- astronomical observations of x-rays were made. So, it starts with x-ray astronomy. One of the features of astronomy for the past half-century, or so, is that, you know, by the 1950s, there had been a lot of astronomy, but it had all been done in optical light, with optical telescopes. And the story of astronomy for the past fifty years has basically been one after another of different kinds of electromagnetic radiation[cw], not optic--other than optical light, have gradually been opened up.
The first of these was radio astronomy[cx]. And so, all of a sudden, people point radio telescopes at the sky, and they find out all sorts of things--one of which, for example, was pulsars, which we talked about the last time.
The next part of the electromagnetic spectrum that was opened was x-rays. Now, there's a problem with doing x-ray observations, which is that x-rays don't make it through the atmosphere. The atmosphere is completely opaque to x-rays. This is a good thing. The Sun emits x-rays, and you would not want to be in a place in which you didn't have an atmosphere to absorb the x-rays on the way to yourself. You'd get skin cancer immediately. And so, the fact that the atmosphere absorbs x-rays is good for everybody, except for the x-ray astronomers, because it makes it difficult to do these kinds of observations. So, this only got started at the point where you could put satellites into orbit outside the atmosphere, and equip them with x-ray detectors, basically Geiger Counters.
There's a lot of talk these days about going back to the Moon. And one of the very few scientific advantages of a moon colony is that you could do ground-based x-ray astronomy. And so, you know, you picture a hobbyist in his backyard, you know, with a kind of Geiger Counter in a coffee can, or something, going outside and observing x-rays from the sky. And I think that would be a great thing--but I digress.
Let's see, x-ray astronomy, yes, in the 1960s. So, they send up Geiger Counters on satellites, and increasingly sophisticated x-ray telescopes over the years. And they discovered something that they didn't expect. Namely--so, this is now in the 1960s also, around the same time the pulsars were discovered. They also discover very strong sources of x-rays; x-ray sources. And there's a lot of energy coming out of these things, thousands of times, even hundreds of thousands of times, the radiation that the Sun emits. Radiation--and from these x-ray sources, essentially all of it in x-rays. There's small amounts of optical, radio, other kinds of radiation, but basically these are x-ray emitting stars. They're stars that emit huge amounts of x-ray luminosity, and not a whole lot else. And they're very, very, very powerful.
And so, people wondered what these were. These were unexpected. Nobody had predicted that this would be there. And as they started to think about what these things might be, they realized, well, what is x-ray? An x-ray is a very energetic photon, very short wavelength light; therefore, each one of the photons carries a big punch. So, these are energetic photons. And the more energetic the radiation that is emitted, in sort of general terms, the hotter the material that emits it has to be, just in order to crank up the energy, you need.
That's why ordinary objects at room temperature glow in the infrared. If you heat them up, they start at thousands of degrees. Things start to glow in the red. You heat them up still further, you get white light, blue light. If you crank things up to hundreds of thousands of degrees, you start to get ultraviolet radiation. And it turns out, in order to get x-rays, you need to have things that have been heated up to millions of degrees.
So, energetic photons would come from--require high temperature, by which I mean, you know, a million degrees, or so. By contrast, the Sun and other similar stars, has a surface temperature of about 6,000 degrees. That's hot enough to glow in the optical, but not hot enough to generate large numbers of x-rays. And you can also go further and say, you can figure out how much radiation ought to come from a given volume of million-degree, whatever it is.
And you discover--so, combining the temperature and the luminosity, there's a little formula which I won't write down, which tells you how big the thing has to be in order to emit that much radiation. If the Sun were five times bigger, it would emit 52 more radiation. And it turns out that if you combine this stuff, the emitting region is small--much smaller than an ordinary star.
There's another argument, a completely different argument, that whatever is emitting these x-rays has to be small, which is the following: the brightness of these things varies. So, also, here's a second argument. Brightness varies, and it varies quickly, hundreds of times a second. Hundreds--so, on time scales of 1/100th of a second, the brightness of these things can vary by a factor of 2, or more.
Now, that immediately tells you that the size of the region that is emitting the radiation has to be smaller than 1/100th of a light second. Because, imagine--here's a thing that's emitting radiation. And so, it's got, you know, photons coming off in all directions. And you're kind of over here watching the thing. If it suddenly changes brightness, you'll see the brightness change from the front part of the object before you see the brightness change from this part of the object, because this part of the object has less of a distance to travel to get to you. And so, the amount of time it takes light to get from one side of this object to the other is a kind of minimum amount of time that you would expect to be able to see a change in the brightness.
Now, you can ask, what if just this little piece gets brighter? Well, then, that little piece had better be emitting essentially all of the radiation you see when it--all of the increased brightness of the radiation that you see. And so, then, you just apply this same argument to that little piece. And so, the size of this has to be less than 0.01 of a light second.
Chapter 3. X-Rays of Binary Stars [00:17:01]
Now, light is 3 x 108 meters per second. So, the size of these things has to be less than 3 x 106 meters. That's less than what? 3,000 kilometers. This is something that's--so, all this radiation, thousands of times the radiation that you see from the Sun, all of it in x-rays has to be coming from something that's substantially smaller than the Earth. And, in fact, some of these things vary on time scales even smaller than that. So, lots of energy, very small object. This points you, again, towards neutron stars, because they can pack a considerable punch in a relatively small volume. And as these objects were studied more and more, a picture came up of what they actually were. And these are things that are called x-ray binary stars. "Binary," meaning a double star--two stars in orbit around one another. And the idea, here, is that one of these stars is a kind of ordinary star like the Sun, got a slightly weird shape, which I'll explain in a minute.
So, this is some kind of relatively ordinary star. And the other star in the system that it's orbiting around is, well, the generic term is, "compact object," an example of which would be a neutron star, or potentially a black hole. And the deal is that these guys are orbiting so close to each other that if you look at the gravitational force on an atom of gas at this point of the star--
Oh, I should say, the reason that the star is this weird shape is because of huge--this is basically a tide. This pulls one part of the star towards it and that distorts the ordinarily spherical shape. And so, you get this kind of teardrop thing. And if you analyze the gravitational forces on an atom of gas, here, it's pulled in two directions. It's pulled downward by--it's pulled towards the ordinary star by the gravity of the ordinary star. But it's also pulled in the other direction by the gravitational force of this other thing, whatever it is. And at this, sort of, teardrop place, here, this peak here, the gravity toward the compact object is greater. And that means that the surface of this particular point on the surface of the ordinary star, in fact, that material is pulled off the star and pulled onto the compact object. It kind of--what happens is, it kind of goes into orbit and it ends up orbiting around the compact object.
So, you have a gas stream, and all this stuff ends up in a big disk of material, here, called an accretion disk. And so, basically, the gas goes into orbit around the compact object. Now, you know something about orbits. These are perfectly ordinary--each atom has its own little orbit. The orbits are perfectly ordinary orbits, which can be described by the usual set of equations. And one thing you know about that is that the inner orbits go faster than the outer orbits. And so, if you imagine two pieces of gas, sort of, right next to each other, one inside the other, the inside one has to go faster. And so, they rub against each other, the different parts of the gas.
So, this gas generates friction, and friction does two things. First, it heats the stuff up. And where does the energy for that heat come from? It extracts energy from the orbit, and that, in turn, leads to the gas spiraling in. So, the gas in this disk gradually spirals in. As it does, it creates a lot heat, generates a lot of radiation. And what was demonstrated in the early 1970s is that the inner parts of such an accretion disk can be heated up to millions of degrees, which is exactly what you want to be able to explain the x-rays. So, inner accretion disk goes up to millions of degrees, and that's where all these x-rays are coming from. Okay. So, that's what these x-ray sources are supposed, in principle, to be. And there's, by now, a lot of evidence that this general picture is basically true. Questions? Yes?
Student: When I was asking you before if we--you directly observed a supermassive black hole that was what I was referring to, would they in turn be the--these like [Inaudible]
Professor Charles Bailyn: The accretion disks?
Student: Yes.
Professor Charles Bailyn: Yes, absolutely. These are also observed around supermassive black holes. That's where the light from quasars comes from--from accretion disks around the supermassive black holes. They have it, too. Again, the question of where that gas comes from is a little less clear than it is in the case of the x-ray binaries. But yes, this is why.
So, there's two ways you know that the supermassive black holes exist. One is from the orbits of stuff around them, and the other is from the emission from the accretion disk. But there isn't always gas. The one in the center of our galaxy, there is no accretion disk, and so, we don't see it at all. And so, in some cases they're accreting gas, in other cases not. Presumably, that's also true of black holes in binary star systems ‒ that there are some of them that aren't close enough to their companion to pull mass off, and we don't see them as bright x-ray sources.
Student: Does that necessarily mean that the objects nearby aren't stable--I mean, are not getting pulled apart by them?
Professor Charles Bailyn: Sorry?
Student: Does that mean that the--does that necessarily mean the nearby objects are not getting pulled apart by these black holes?
Professor Charles Bailyn: The nearby objects are not getting pulled apart. Well, the companion star is gradually being stripped of all its gas by the black hole, in this case. But if it were a little further away it would be a perfectly stable orbit. Other questions, yes?
Student: Why should the inside have a higher velocity than the outside?
Professor Charles Bailyn: Oh. This is smaller. That's bigger. Yes?
Student: Yeah, if your compact object is a neutron star, then could it also be a pulsar?
Professor Charles Bailyn: In principle, it could. In practice, it turns out that all that gas swirling around does bad things to the magnetic field and to the radio emission. So, in practice, they tend not to be pulsars, but in principle, they could be.
Student: Also, is pulsar, by definition, like, one that's oriented in such a way that we can see the pulsations or is it [Inaudible]
Professor Charles Bailyn: Well, I mean, it depends on exactly how you define it. But a pulsar is something that emits radio from an off-axis magnetic field. Presumably, if it doesn't happen to cross us, we wouldn't know it's a pulsar, but somebody else in the galaxy might.
Student: Okay.
Professor Charles Bailyn: Other questions at this point? All right, so, having found a bunch of these x-ray binaries, the question is, "Can you tell whether they're black holes or not?"
And now, let me remind you that the mass of a neutron star has to be less than the three times the mass of the Sun. So, the plan is, you observe the orbit of the companion, and determine the mass of the compact object. And there's a derivation you can do, which I won't show you, but again, you can look up on the black hole website, which shows--remember what we're doing, here.
Let's observe the radial velocity of the companion versus time--goes up, goes down. And you determine two things from this: the orbital period and the amplitude of this sine curve, which I'm going to call K. And it turns out, you can prove the following relationship. This is actually easy to prove but it takes three pages to do it, so, I won't go through the exercise.PK3 / 2πG is equal to the mass of the compact object--the mass of the thing you don't see, times sin3i. I'll explain that in a second--times 1 plus the mass of the object that--the ordinary star, divided by the mass of the compact object, and this is squared.
So now, why would you do this? So, this is a little calculation. You start with Kepler's laws. You do three pages of algebra. You come out with this. It's written down on the classes server. Why would you do--why would you express it in this particular form? Here's the deal. This is called the mass function, so-called, and can be observed from the velocity curve only.
Student: [Inaudible]
Professor Charles Bailyn: Yes, the whole term--this only. That's called the mass function. And the term on the right, here, is very interesting, because it's the mass of the object you don't see. Mass of the compact object, times something that is less than 1, sine of any angle.
Oh, I should say, the i here, this is the inclination of the object to the line of sight, if it's coming exactly towards you and away from, i is 90 degrees. If it's going around this way, it's zero. That has to be in there because you're observing radial velocity.
But it doesn't matter what this is. Sine of anything is 1 or less. Sine cubed of anything is 1 or less. So, this term up here has to be less than 1. This term on the bottom has to be greater than 1. It's 1 plus something squared. So, on the bottom, you have a term that's greater than 1. That means that this quantity, which you can easily observe, is less than the mass of the compact object. So, if the mass function--you measure the mass function, and it comes out to be greater than three solar masses, then the compact object is also greater than three solar masses. And if that's true, it has to be a black hole, because it has to be smaller, so small that it could otherwise only reasonably be a neutron star. And yet it's bigger than the mass of the neutron star itself.
There's a moderate technical problem with making this observation. And the problem is, this is hard to observe, because the accretion disk is too bright. So, the accretion disk outshines the star. Fortunately, nature solves that problem for us, because many of these objects have intermittent accretion. So the accretion happens. You see all these x-rays. Then the accretion turns off for various reasons. And then, when the accretion's off, all you see is the companion star, and so you can--when the accretion is off, you can make this measurement.
Chapter 4. Finding Black Holes with X-Rays [00:30:08]
So, here's how you go about finding a black hole. First, suddenly, there's a new source of x-rays. The x-rays turn on in one of these transient systems. Then, you wait. Then the x-rays turn off. This happens after a few months, typically. Once the x-rays turn off, that means the accretion disk isn't there anymore, and you measure the mass function. And then, if that's greater than three solar masses, you win; namely, you've discovered a black hole. And this is a sequence of events that I'm rather fond of. This is what got me tenure. And so, I thought I'd show you an example of how this works out in real life. Let's see, okay. Here is--oh, let me turn the lights down just slightly.
Right, so this is just a, sort of, artist's conception of an x-ray binary. Here's the companion star. Here's the accretion disk. Down in the middle, there is a compact object so small you can't see it. This red stuff is supposed to be radio emission coming out of the poles. And you can see the little gas stream going from one to another. This is what it looks like when it's x-ray active. When the x-rays turn off, what happens is, the stuff just piles up in the outer part of the accretion disk. There's not enough friction to drive it down in there, no x-rays, and basically, all you can see is the companion star.
So, let me now take you back fifteen years in time. This is something that crossed my desk shortly after I came to Yale as an assistant professor in the early 1990s. This is an astronomical telegram. That's an old fashioned word. Now, of course, we do it all by email. And these are a system for distributing the results of fast-breaking news in the heavens. You know, if you see a supernova or some exciting--or comet, or something exciting going off in the sky, you can't wait to publish it for a year and a half, because, by then, it will be gone, and no one else will study it. So, we have this system for distributing news of fast-breaking events, so that other people can study them.
In this particular case, there's a whole bunch of astro jargon down in here. The title's the only thing you have to pay attention to. "X-ray transient in the constellation of Musca." New x-ray source suddenly appeared in Musca. These guys found it.
You've probably never heard of the constellation of Musca--Musca the Fly. Yeah. There's two reasons you haven't heard of it. One is it's in the southern hemisphere. You can't see it from here. But the other reason is it's a pretty pathetic excuse for a constellation. It's one, lousy, fourth magnitude star. That's why they call it the Fly, right? But they had to call that part of the sky something, and it's now my favorite constellation because it has this object in it.
Anyway, a bright x-ray source suddenly turned up in Musca. A month or so later, the x-ray source was still bright. I found myself in this lovely spot. This is an observatory in Chile where you can see the southern hemisphere, among other things. And the two telescopes pictured here--this was, at the time, the largest, most powerful telescope in the southern hemisphere. This is the door, just to give you a sense of scale.
And this thing here, in the foreground, which looms large in this picture, but is actually much smaller than that, I have to tell you, is one of the more far-flung outposts of the Yale Empire. This is Yale's one-meter telescope. It was built in Bethany, Connecticut, and then in the early 1970s, somebody said, well, Connecticut's a really stupid place to have a research telescope, it snows all the time. And so they, kind of, picked it up and took it down to Chile. And so, it's, by now, only our second best research telescope, and I'm very fond of it.
And so, I found myself observing at this telescope a few months after the discovery of this x-ray source in Musca. So, I junked the program I thought I was going to do and looked at that thing, instead. And what I found was that every 10.5 hours it got a little brighter, and then a little fainter, and a then a little brighter. And this was the--the accretion disk was still there, so presumably, this was some effect, for example, of the companion star crossing in front of the accretion disk, or something like that.
And so, I fired off my own telegram. There's two things you need to know from this one. That's me. And the other one is that I claimed that there was a 10.5-hour modulation in the brightness of the source, which might be the orbital period. That's an interesting thing to know, because if you know the orbital period, if you know P in the mass function, and you think that this might turn out to be a black hole, you can figure out how big K has to be in order for this to be a black hole. And the answer is that if you were to measure the radial velocity of this thing, the difference between the maximum and the minimum radial velocity would be--if that were 800 kilometers a second or greater, then the compact object in this system would have to be a black hole.
Problem was, I couldn't make that measurement, because, first of all, the Yale telescope wasn't powerful enough to do it. Second of all, the accretion disk was still too bright to allow observations of the companion. So, I teamed up with a couple people who had done this once already, before: Ron Remillard from MIT, Jeff McClintock from The Smithsonian. And we applied to get time on the big telescope.
The big telescope, which I showed you, is from The National Observatory, and you have to write a proposal to get time on it. Many people want to get time on it. It's quite competitive. But we wrote a good proposal. And so, the following year, after the x-rays had turned off, they gave us three nights of telescope time on the big telescope in order to make this radial velocity curve.
So, just to orient you, here's Chile. Here's the capital, Santiago. Cerro Tololo's up in the Andes, here. So, you take this enormous plane ride and then drive up to--drive up into here. And then, what happened was--let's see. The first night it rained. This is kind of an occupational hazard. The reason there are all these telescopes in Chile is because it's mountains in the desert, which is an excellent place to put telescopes. As it turns out, even in the desert, sometimes it's cloudy, sometimes it rains. That was the first night, so that was out.
The second night--oh, that was interesting, there was a hailstorm. I don't know if you've ever been in a six-story high, hollow steel building in the hail. It's a very interesting experience, but it's not productive, scientifically. And so, you know, they give you these little rooms to sleep in, which are light-tight and sound-tight, because you have to sleep in the daytime. And so, there's this very dramatic moment. You wake up at 4:00 in the afternoon and you raise the shades to see if there are clouds. So, fortunately, the third of our three nights, it was all clear. The storm had passed and we were able, then--and so, now, we're sitting somewhere in this building, and we were able to make our observations. So, let me show you what we did.
Here is a plot of hours, time and hours, on the night of the 3rd of April, 1992, versus radial velocity. So, this is going to be a radial velocity plot. First thing we observed was this point, right after sunset. And you notice that the object is coming toward us at 250 kilometers a second. That's already very good news. Because 250 kilometers a second is actually a little greater than the escape velocity of the galaxy. And so, the only reason something would have that kind of speed is if it was in orbit around some other nearby object--or objects in the galaxy aren't usually that bright.
So, we made a couple more observations. And after the third observation, it was clear that the basic parameters of this system were, more or less, correct. It had started off coming at us at 250 kilometers a second. A couple hours later, it was going away from us at 200 kilometers a second. So, in a mere two hours, it had turned itself around from coming at us at a high rate of speed, to going away from us. So, that's good. It's in an orbit. It's in an orbit with a very short period. And so, that was very encouraging.
And then, we collected more data. And by about midnight, we were feeling pretty pleased with ourselves, because you can see what's happening. It's now coming--going away from us at 400 kilometers a second, but clearly it's about to turn around and go this way. If you extrapolate 5 ¼ hours before this turnaround, you'd get a point down here. That meant it would have been going from minus 400 to positive 400. That's 800 kilometers a second. If you believe that, then this probably is a black hole.
So, we're feeling pretty pleased with ourselves. We opened a little bottle of the local firewater--awful stuff called Pisco. You're not supposed to do that, right? You're not supposed to operate heavy machinery. And nature was not kind. We were punished for this. There was a small earthquake. Chile's in an earthquake zone, and so, this does bad things for precision-aligned optics. So, the next point was a little skewed for reasons that we never explained in our paper. And then, there was a gap where, for a little while, we didn't take any data, while we were straightening ourselves out again.
And then, here's the next point. And so, now, that's encouraging again. And then, more data was collected toward the end of the night. And so, as dawn was beginning to come up, we were kind of back where we started. The thing was coming towards us at 250 kilometers a second. And we really needed one more point down here, in order to nail the whole thing down.
The problem was that the object, of course, is now setting in the West. You know, the Earth turns, so objects rise in the East and they set in the West. And if you can picture a telescope following an object down into the West, it's sort of pointing like this. The principle optical element in this telescope is a huge mirror, a four-meter wide mirror. So, thirteen feet across. And it's not bolted down, particularly, because if you put bolts in the mirror, changes in temperature will change the size of the bolts, and it'll throw the optics out of alignment. So, it's just, kind of, sitting there, and it's tipping this way. And eventually it's going to, you know, fall out, fall on the floor.
It is way more than seven years' bad luck for an astronomer to break the primary mirror of the largest telescope in the southern hemisphere. And so, they don't let the astronomers actually move the telescope themselves. That would be far too dangerous. They have trained experts to do this. And the trained expert was saying to us at this point, you know, "You've got to stop observing this object. We're beyond the safety limits," and so forth.
And we said, as scientists do, "No, no, in the interest of science, we must have one more point." This argument went on for a while, and they were about to, kind of, pull the plug on us. And then, we said, "Okay, fine," you know, "we understand. Safety of the telescope is paramount." But during the argument, we'd accumulated one more point. And so, this is kind of the clinching case, down here, as it's coming towards us at 400 kilometers a second. So, we're very pleased with ourselves.
Over breakfast, we did the exercise of finding the best-fit sine curve. Here it is. And if you work out what the mass function is--the orbital period is 10.5 hours--the mass function is 3.1 times the mass of the Sun. So, very good, very good news. You'll notice this plus or minus 0.05. The data's not all that great. We've subsequently gotten a lot more data on this thing. It does turn out to be about 3.1. But it's also true that--remember that that formula had this sin i in it. And we were able, by other means, to determine what the inclination is. And it's now clear that this object has a--that this binary system has a compact object of a mass of about seven solar masses in it. Very, very nice thing.
We published this paper. Other people have published other papers. By now--oh, here's our telegram from the next morning. Again, gobbledygook, except for the fact that the value of the mass function is 3.1, "providing dynamical evidence that the primary is a black hole."
So, we wanted to publish a paper, you know, entitled, "Black Hole Found in the Constellation of Musca." People were a little cautious about that. They said, you know, you haven't yet proved that Einstein's relativity is correct. If Einstein's wrong, this doesn't necessarily have to be a black hole. We said, come on. You get to assume that Einstein's right. They said, well, maybe not. So, we get to call these things, "dynamically confirmed black hole candidates." That's the official word.
And here is the current collection of these things, scaled to the Sun and Mercury. The one we were looking at, it's a very close one. It's a 10.5-hour orbit. This thing, much bigger, thirty-hour [correction: thirty-day] orbit, much bigger companion star. But all of the black holes in here are sort of between five and fifteen times the mass of the Sun.
And so, now, fifteen years later, there's a whole collection of these things. There's also a collection of things that turned out to be neutron stars. So now, you can do an experiment. And you can do experiment in general relativity. Here's the derivation. I'll skip that for you. And you can ask yourself whether event horizons actually exist.
So, here's the experiment. You have a dozen or so things that are neutron stars. You have another dozen or so things that are black holes. You pour gas onto both of them. And indeed--you know, that's what the companion stars are doing. That's why they have all these x-rays.
What happens if gas falls on a neutron star? It picks up a lot of speed and starts going at the speed of light and it hits right into the surface. And so, when it hits the surface, all its kinetic energy, all its thermal energy, has to stop. The kinetic energy stops, and all that energy goes into the surface of the neutron star, somehow--what's called a boundary layer--and has to, in some way, get re-radiated. It basically heats up the surface of the neutron star. You get x-rays from this surface layer.
Gas falling onto a black hole doesn't do it. It falls right through the event horizon. And the kinetic energy and the thermal energy in that gas just contributes to the mass of the black hole, and it doesn't get re-radiated. So your prediction is, for the same amount of mass falling onto a neutron star as onto a black hole, you would predict that the neutron star would be brighter, because all of this extra energy brought in by the accreting material would be radiated--whereas, in the case of the black hole, it would not be. It would just be captured by the black hole itself.
So, with the most sophisticated recent x-ray telescope, people have tried to measure black holes and neutron stars in a situation where they emit comparable amounts--where the mass accretion rate, the amount of mass that's being accreted, is comparable. So, the black things here are the black holes. The open circles are the neutron stars. This is a measure of brightness and it's logarithmic. So, this is 10-8, 10-6 and some silly set of units.
And so, this, between here and here, that's a factor of 100. This is the orbital period. The reason they plot the orbital period is, there's good reason to think that the amount of mass accretion is proportional to the orbital period. So, you expect long orbits to have more mass accretion than shorter ones.
But the point of this graph is clear. There's a gap you can drive a truck through of about a factor of 100 in the brightness between the neutron stars, the things that we think are neutron stars, and the things we think of as black holes. And so, the interpretation of this has been that the black holes don't have a surface. Because if they had a surface, then all of this extra energy would have to radiate, as it does in the case of the neutron stars.
Chapter 5. Conclusion [00:46:43]
So, this is a first step towards a test of strong-field general relativity. It's only a first step, because you really have to understand how much mass is falling, and what the geometry of the mass flow is, and a whole bunch of very complicated gas dynamics. This is sometimes called "gastrophysics." And so, that's what we're working on doing now, to try and understand exactly what's going on with these things. And if one understood that, then you might take such a plot to represent a proof that event horizons exist. And so, that kind of brings you up to 2007, in the study of strong-field relativity and black holes. And that's the end of this section of the course. That's the end of this section of the semester. Have a good break and we'll torment you with a test afterwards.
[end of transcript]
ASTR 160 - Lecture 16 - Hubble's Law and the Big Bang
Chapter 1. Introduction to Cosmology [00:00:00]
Professor Charles Bailyn: Welcome to part three of the course. This is going to be about cosmology. One of the most amazing things that's happened over the past half century or so is that cosmology, which is the study of the Universe as a whole, has become a scientific subject, and something that one can say something about in scientific terms, rather than merely philosophical terms.
In recent years, in the past ten years or so, there has been kind of a revolution in cosmology, which has come about because of the discovery that the vast majority of the Universe is made out of stuff that we have no idea what it is. So, the discovery is, we have no idea what the Universe is made of. And that actually, you know, it doesn't sound so good. It sounds like this is a big failure of science, somehow.
But scientists are clever, so we describe it differently. What we claim is that what has happened is that we have discovered dark energy. Dark energy, what is that? We don't have a clue, but it's most of the Universe. And we've discovered that it exists. So, that's kind of where we are right now.
What I want to do over the next four or five weeks is talk about the discovery of dark energy--how that was done. And now that we know that it's there, but we don't what it is, what people intend to do about it. And this is, I should say, only a relatively small fraction of modern cosmology. If you want to know about many of the other interesting things that are going in cosmology, you have to take a whole course, or several courses, on this topic. Such courses exist. I recommend Astro 170 or 220 if you find yourself interested in this kind of thing.
But nevertheless, this one particular discovery--and, in fact, what I'm going to be focusing on is not just dark energy, but one particular way that dark energy--the first way. There are now other indications that exist. One particular way in which dark energy has been discovered. And so, it's a fairly narrow focus that I'll be taking here, but that will enable us to get into some depth about how this discovery was made.
So, let me let you in on the secret before we even begin. Dark energy is something that you can't see. That's sort of its name. We've done this twice already, right? We've discovered planets around other stars--that you couldn't see the planets. How do you do that? You look at the star--the motion of the star. We've discovered the existence of black holes which, of course, you can't see. How do you do that? You look at the motion of some star that is influenced by the existence of the black hole. So, what are we going to do about dark energy? Well, this isn't hard to extrapolate. What we're going to do is we're going to look at the motion of things that we can see, and infer the presence of dark energy.
And of course, how do we look at the motion? We look at Doppler shifts. That will be another recurring theme. And so, the plan of action here is actually not so different from something we've done a couple of times before, although the context and the implications, and the particular details, needless to say, are.
Chapter 2. Spiral Nebulae[cy] and Hubble's Redshift Diagram [00:03:34]
Okay. So, let's go back in time almost ninety years, back to 1920. So, supposing one were to give a course in Frontiers and Controversies in Astrophysics in the year 1920. What would one have been talking about? Frontiers and Controversies. The big issue, at least in terms of cosmology, was the question of the so-called spiral nebulae. These had been discovered over the previous few decades after the invention of photography, allowed pictures of the sky to be created. And as people took pictures of the sky, what they discovered was, scattered all over the sky are these little spiral clouds, the so-called spiral nebulae.
What are these things, they wondered. And, in particular, where are these things? And there were two basic hypotheses. One was that these are, sort of, clouds--shining clouds of gas. These were known to exist in other kinds of shapes. So, these are clouds of some kind of glowing gas, and that they are part of our so-called galaxy. Galaxy comes from the Greek word for milk. It's basically Greek for Milky Way. The Milky Way is this band of stars across the sky. It looks like just a white streak. You can't see it in the city with city lights. You know, if you've never seen this, go somewhere dark. Wait until the Moon goes down. Get your eyes adapted and then look for the Milky Way. It's really very spectacular. If you really want to do this right, do it in the southern hemisphere, because the center of our galaxy is down there. It's quite spectacular.
Anyway, it had been known since Galileo's time that what the Milky Way really was, was a band of stars. And so--that there's this huge bunch of stars out there, so faint, so packed together, we see it just as a continuous band of light. And so, all these stars--that's our galaxy. And the question was whether these spiral nebulae might be little clouds of something or other scattered around our galaxy.
The alternative, less popular at the time, but perhaps more spectacular, is that the spiral nebulae are galaxies themselves--are whole galaxies of stars, different from our own galaxy. These were sometimes referred to as island universes. So, the Milky Way is our own galaxy, and each one of these tiny little spiral things is a galaxy itself, located much, much further away, obviously, than any of the stars that we can see.
And you can see that this is a question of some importance, in particular, to how big you think the Universe is. If all these spiral nebulae are part of our own galaxy, then maybe what the Universe is, is one galaxy. And at that time, it was already starting to be known how big the galaxy was, and so forth. But if each one of them is its own galaxy, then obviously, the entire Universe must be much, much bigger, because it contains thousands, perhaps millions, of individual galaxies, each of them more or less like our own.
So, we know what the answer's going to turn out to be. This is correct [points to "island universes" on slide notes]. But they didn't know that in 1920. And, in fact, they staged what was called the Great Debate in 1920, between a very famous astronomer named Harlow Shapley, who was at Harvard. And he maintained that the spiral nebulae must be part of our own galaxy. And so, he had many good reasons to think this. There was a lot of evidence that the spiral nebulae couldn't be that far away. They must be really quite nearby. And so, Shapely had, in the true Harvard manner, all of the right arguments, and was completely wrong. And his opponent, a man named Curtis, educated at Yale, but at that point working somewhere else, turned out to be entirely right, but totally lost the debate because he just didn't have that much evidence backing him up. So, the intuition of the Yale man comes through.
So, this is a famous incident in the history of science. It garnered enormous attention at the time. Remember, this is a year after the eclipse expedition has verified Einstein's Theory of General Relativity, so people are pretty excited about modern science at the time. And this was reported widely in the press. So, this is another one of our, sort of, science fables, here, "The Great Debate." And one version of the moral of this story might be, you can have all the right arguments and still be wrong--have many good arguments and still be wrong, as Mr. Shapley turned out to be.
Interestingly, at the time, in 1920, they thought, you know, it's going to take us a long time to really get to the truth of this, and turned out not to be the case. Within just a few years after the debate had taken place, this problem was totally solved. And the man who solved it was perhaps the greatest observational astronomer of the twentieth century--a man named Edwin Hubble, after whom a telescope was subsequently named. And what helped solve this was simply better equipment. And, in fact, starting kind of a trend that has continued for a century now, what happened was--
So, Hubble was out in California, where there are nice, clear skies, and persuaded a rich man to give a lot of money to build a really big telescope. This was a 100" telescope. That's the diameter of the--the diameter of the mirror. This is actually still in use, although the site is no good because it's way too near to the lights of San Francisco. But he took this brand new telescope. He looked at the spiral nebulae. And he did the same thing to the spiral nebulae that Galileo had done to the Milky Way. He resolved it into individual stars. And he could see the individual stars in these spiral nebulae, and discovered in the nearest of them that they were made up of stars. And then, he noticed that the stars that were making them up were incredibly faint. And that even the brightest stars in these things were incredibly faint. And so, he inferred the distance to these things by assuming that, you know, they're kind of ordinary stars, like any other kind of stars, except they're way, way fainter, and therefore they must be much further away.
And this was compelling evidence that these spiral nebulae really were island universes--galaxies like our own. And the key thing to do--that is, to have a telescope powerful enough to resolve some of the nearby examples into individual stars. So, there are many galaxies. This was known shortly after the Great Debate took place. And that made the Universe very much larger than people had previously suspected, because there are all these galaxies around.
So, Hubble was the great expert at observing galaxies. And so, the next thing he decided he would look at is--okay, now we know these things are galaxies, let's check out their-- you know, he took Doppler shift measurements. He's trying to figure out the motions of galaxies.
And so, he discovered a very strange thing. Namely, that they are all going away from us. Every galaxy he measured was redshifted. And so, by the usual Doppler shift interpretation of these things, they must all be moving away from us. And Hubble went further, and he created one of the most famous diagrams in all of astronomy, in which he plots redshift--which is to say Z, which is to say radial velocity divided by the speed of light, at least in the Newtonian approximation, which he was working in, versus distance. So, he figured out how far away these galaxies were. He measured their redshift. And what he discovered is that these things were very tightly correlated.
So, if you plot each galaxy, measure a distance and a redshift for each galaxy, for a large number of galaxies, what you find is that they line up like this. This is the so-called Hubble Diagram[cz], and it's basically the thing we're going to be talking about for the next five weeks or so--is Hubble Diagrams, and what you can infer from them. And the Hubble Diagram can be, sort of, summed up in an equation. If this is a straight line, then it must be true that the velocity of a given galaxy is equal to a constant, which was given the letter H, for the Hubble Constant[da], times the distance. This is Hubble's Constant. And that just basically says in algebra what this says pictorially, that these things line up in a straight line.
The Hubble Constant is an extremely important number. You measure it by creating these Hubble Diagrams and just measuring the slope of the line. And the primary scientific purpose of the Hubble Space Telescope, the largest and most expensive science project ever created, was to get an accurate measurement of the Hubble Constant. So, all these beautiful pictures you see are byproducts. The purpose of the thing was to measure the Hubble Constant accurately. There had been, for many years, a dispute over what the correct value was. This was resolved by the Space Telescope and other things within the past decade. And this was a big success. We now know what the Hubble Constant is. It's measured in somewhat weird units. It's seventy or so kilometers per second, per megaparsec [Mpc]. All right.
Now, let's pause there for just a moment. You can see why they use this peculiar unit. Because you want to--they're measuring velocity in kilometers per second, and they're measuring distance in megaparsecs. Mega, of course, doesn't just mean big. It's a technical term. It means a million. It means 106 parsecs. A parsec, you will remember, is about three light years, or 3 x 1016 meters, or 3 x 1013 kilometers.
And so, for each megaparsec that a given galaxy is away--and notice, now, we've changed our units from parsecs, which we used for stars, to megaparsecs. That's basically the change in the scale of the Universe that came about when people realized that the spiral nebulae were galaxies. So, now you have to talk about megaparsecs. In fact, now we also talk, from time to time, about gigaparsecs, which are billions of parsecs.
For each megaparsec that a galaxy is away from us, it moves 70 kilometers per second more away from us. So, something that's 10 megaparsecs away ought to be moving 700 kilometers per second. Something that's 100 megaparsecs away would be moving 7,000 kilometers a second away from us. And that's just an expression of what this relationships is.
Hubble, by the way, got this quite wrong. He correctly lined them all up, but his value for the Hubble Constant turned out to be about 500, in these units, which was quite wrong, and we'll talk about that--why that was, later on. But, by now, with the Hubble Space Telescope, we totally know this, and that's an important result.
Now, this diagram and this relationship are basically the key to what we're going to be talking about. So, in fact, the fact that there's this linear relationship tells you several things. It tells you that the Universe is expanding. And because of that, it tells you that the--indirectly, there's other evidence that has to be brought to bear, as well, that the Big Bang exists. So, this is the basis of Big Bang cosmology.
Chapter 3. Measuring the Distance of a Star: The Parallax Method[db] [00:17:35]
I don't want to talk about that right now. We'll talk about the Big Bang on Tuesday. We'll have a whole big question-and-answer session, so, bring all your questions about the Big Bang and cosmology. We'll do that all up on Tuesday. What I want to talk about now is much more mundane. Namely, how do you measure these points? How do you do this? How do you create this diagram? This diagram has these fabulous implications, but in order to understand what's going on, you'd better know how you get the diagram in the first place.
Now, part of it's clear. The x-axis we understand fairly well. Measuring radial velocity--that's easy. That's just the Doppler shift. So, that comes directly out of a particular kind of measurement that you can readily do. The y-axis is the biggest problem in all of astronomy; namely, how do you measure the distance to something?
And, if you think about it, that's what this Great Debate was all about. Some people thought that the distances to these spiral nebulae were a few hundred, or maybe a few thousand parsecs. Other people thought they were millions of parsecs away, and it wasn't clear which was right. And if you think about looking up into the sky, looking at stars in the sky at night, you can see where there's a problem. You look up there. You see a bunch of stars, and suddenly one of them shoots across the sky. It's a shooting star. Except for the motion across the sky, they don't look that different, and yet, some of them--the fixed stars, are hundreds of light years away. The planets, which look much the same to the naked eye are, you know, a million times closer. And that shooting star is in the top of the atmosphere. And it's very hard to tell what the distance is when you just kind of look up there. And so, distance is hard. And that's basically the problem I want to talk about for the rest of today's class. How do you measure distances? Yes?
Student: You said that redshift was easy, but how do we know what the original wavelength is?
Professor Charles Bailyn: Oh, how do you know what the original wavelength was? You make the assumption that atomic physics and chemistry are the same in the distant galaxies as they are here, and therefore, hydrogen should emit lines at the same frequency as they do in the atmosphere.
Now, one of the things you can do if you don't like what the cosmological implications of things is, you can say, well, rather than interpreting this as cosmology, let's just say that in distant portions of the Universe, physics is different. If you go down that road, you can get any answer you want. And this has been seriously discussed from time to time.
All right. So, how do you measure distance? That's the key. Well, there's one, and only one, kind of, direct way you could imagine doing this. Here's the Sun. Here's the Earth going around the Sun. Here's a nearby star. And here are a bunch of other, much further away stars. They're all scattered around the sky. And you observe this nearby star during the course of the year. As the year goes on, you observe it repeatedly. You observe it from here, for example. And when you observe it from here, it's in this direction, and therefore, it appears to be in that position relative to the other stars. Whereas, when you observe it here, it's in a little bit of a different position with respect to the other stars. It looks like it's here. And so, if you observe this star repeatedly over the course of the year, it appears to move back and forth against the background of the other stars.
This is a triangle. We know what to do about triangles. You can measure this angle because that's just the angular separation of the two apparent positions of this star in the sky. We know this distance. That's 1 Astronomical Unit, because this is the Earth going around the Sun. And then, what we want to know is the distance to this star, D. Let's call that D1. And we know the equation for this already. We've done this before. This is α = D2 / D1, where D2, in this case, is exactly 1 Astronomical Unit.
And you may recall that if you measure this in arc seconds, and you measure this in parsecs, and you measure this in AU, you get a consistent set of answers. And so, the way it works out is 1 / α, in arc seconds, equals the distance in parsecs. And the reason that works is because D2, by this method, is always equal to 1 Astronomical Unit. If you try this on Jupiter, you have to account for the fact that Jupiter's further away.
This is called the parallax method. It's common in surveying. You know, you look at the same thing from two different places. You can figure out distances by basically trigonometry, here. This is called the parallax method. And a parsec--this is the definition of a parsec--is one parallax second. It's a contraction. Because you measure an arc second and the distance is one parsec. And that is the definition of a parsec. That's why we use parsec as a distance measurement, because it comes naturally out of this parallax method.
And so, that's a fairly direct geometric method. This is a surveying technique. This is how--and this is a straightforward way of getting the distance. And the problem with this is that it only works on things that are really nearby. Because we can measure, you know, maybe, a hundredth of an arc second change in position, but no better than that. And so, you can only get measurements of distances in this way out to a few hundred parsecs. Works to a kind of maximum, given our current instrumentation of a few hundred parsecs.
But the center of our galaxy is 8,000 parsecs away. These other galaxies are megaparsecs away. We can't be measuring 1 one-millionth of an arc second, at least not at the moment, in terms of parallax. So, this only works for the very nearest stars. And that's why there was all this confusion about the spiral nebulae because, you know, if they were 500 parsecs away, you'd never be able to tell.
Chapter 4. Measuring Brightness: The Standard Candle Method[dc] [00:25:13]
So, most other distance measurements--methods of distance--are some form of what's called the Standard Candle Method. So, here's how the Standard Candle Method works. It's a three-step process. Part one, you look at something. You know how bright something is--how bright something is. This is basically a version of what Hubble did when he figured out that the spiral nebulae must be very, very distant, and must, therefore, be island universes. You know how bright something is. In the case of Hubble, he's looking at the brightest stars in the galaxy. He figures they're about as bright as the brightest stars in our own galaxy, so, he knows how bright they are.
Part two, you measure how bright the object looks. You take a picture of it, or you count photons, or whatever it is that you do, and you figure out how bright it looks. And obviously, for something of a given brightness, the further away it is, the fainter it looks. And we know exactly how that works. It's a distance-squared thing. If it's twice as far away, it's a fourth as bright. If it's three times further away, it's 1/9th as bright. It goes as one over the distance, squared. This is a well-known fact. You can try this out with light bulbs at home.
And so, if you know how bright it is, and you measure how bright it appears to be, then you can compute the distance. Okay. And this is why it's called a standard candle--oh, so, the way this is--how do you know this? That's the big question. How do you know how bright the thing is in the first place? And the answer is, usually, that you're looking at something which is an example of a class of objects, like stars, or bright stars, whose brightness is known.
And that's why you use the term, standard candle. Because here's a bunch of things. They're all the same brightness. They all have the same standard candle power. Some of them look fainter than others, but ones that look fainter obviously have to be further away. And if you know the true brightness of this class of objects, you can figure out how far away any example of it is. Hence, standard candles.
And the problem with this is this phrase here, as you can pretty clearly see. If you get it wrong--if you make the wrong assumption about how bright these objects are, you're going to screw this up completely, and that's what Hubble did. Hubble was looking at a particular kind of bright star, which he thought he knew how bright it was, and he was wrong. And so, he got the wrong Hubble Constant.
Now, because he used the same kind of star in all his galaxies, he got it the same amount wrong for all these different galaxies. So, they still lined up. They just lined up along the wrong track. So, it was still true that something that he thought was twice as far away as something else was in fact twice as far away as something else. He just got both of those numbers wrong by the same factor.
Okay. This brings us to the awkward question of, "How do you measure brightness?" And now, we have to talk about one of the great impediments to learning astronomy--namely, the magnitude scale. Astronomers count brightness upside down and logarithmically. And I am now obliged, by my membership in the astronomical community, to inflict this upon you. So, the magnitude scale--this is how we measure brightness. It's upside down and logarithmic. And the key numerical relationship that works looks like this. If you subtract the magnitude of one object from another, that equals minus five halves times the log of the ratio of the brightnesses [5⁄2 log (b1 /b2)]. Don't panic. The magic word, here, is "help sheet," which will be posted later this afternoon. So, this is a key equation.
So, let me just define the terms. This is the magnitude of two different objects and this is the brightness of the two objects. Whereby "brightness," I mean something sensible, like how many photons per second do you get from them, or some other kind of true measure of how bright they are.
Now, this is a somewhat awkward equation, because it's a relative equation. It doesn't tell you what the magnitude of either one of these things is. What it tells you is the magnitude of one compared to another. So, in order to figure out the magnitude of something, you have to know the magnitude of something else. And so, you need one other piece of information to have this be useful, which is that they have defined a particular star to have magnitude 0. The star, Vega, is defined to have magnitude 0. So, if you start with Vega, you can figure out the magnitude of any other given object.
Actually, this is now causing trouble, because it turns out that in the far infrared, Vega is variable. And that's kind of unfortunate for the basis of the whole magnitude system to turn out to be variable. But, they've coped with that in various ways.
All right. Let me pause and remind you of some things about logarithms, which you may have forgotten. What's the definition here? The logarithm of 10x = x. That's the definition of a logarithm. So, for example, the logarithm of 3 x 102 is equal to the logarithm of 10½ that's 3 times 102, is equal to the logarithm of 102.5. Because when you multiply 10x by 10yyou get 10x + y, which is equal to 2.5. That's an example. More examples on the help sheet. Just, in general, log (10x x 10y) = x + y. Because when you add those together, that's how it works. log (10x / 10y) = x - y. Again, because of the way logarithms multiply together. And the logarithm of--let's see, 10x, raised to the mth power, is equal to mx [log([10x]m) =mx].
This, by the way, is why logarithms are so incredibly useful. You should always do all your arithmetic in logarithms. You should just automatically convert everything in your head into logarithms. In fact, in the days before calculators, this is how people used to do arithmetic. This is how slide rules work, I should say. They mark the thing off logarithmically and then you move them back and forth. And people, you know--if you memorize, like, ten logarithms of a few convenient numbers, you can do all sorts of calculations in your head because multiplication turns into addition, which is much, much easier to do. And so, if you can convert things into logarithms in your head, then all you have to do is add numbers. That's easy.
Similarly, taking something to the mth power, for example, taking the square root of a number, or taking the cube of a number, or something like that, reduces down to multiplication. It's hard to take a square root of a number in your head, but it's easy to divide a number by two, which is the equivalent of taking a square root. So, if you're thinking in logarithms, all you got to do is divide it by two, and you can amaze your friends by doing square roots in your head--if your friends are the kinds of people who are amazed by that kind of thing. Mine are. And so, I recommend this to you. If you have to prove that you've learned something in college, spend a half hour memorizing ten different logarithms and then just blow people's minds by taking square roots on bets. Okay.
Or you can do problem sets in Astronomy 160. For example, Sirius--the star Sirius, which is the brightest star in the sky, is about three times brighter than Vega. So, what's its magnitude? What's its magnitude? Well, let's write down the equation. Magnitude of Sirius minus the magnitude of Vega is equal to -5⁄2 log of the brightness of Sirius, divided by the brightness of Vega.
Now, any time you see three times brighter or twenty times fainter, or anything of that kind, what you're really talking about is a ratio. If Sirius is three times brighter than Vega, that means the brightness of Sirius divided by the brightness of Vega is three. That's what that statement means. And so, we can just plug it right in. -5⁄2 log (3). Because Sirius is three times brighter than Vega, so that ratio is equal to 3. What's the log of 3? One half. Thank you very much. This is equal to -5⁄2 log (10½). You will remember that the square root of 10 is 3. So, 3 is also equal to π, but for logarithms, the important thing is that 3 is equal to the square root of 10. And so, this is (-5⁄2) x (½). -5⁄4.
Now, the magnitude of Vega, we know. That's 0. So, the magnitude of Sirius is equal to -5⁄4. This is what I mean by the fact that the scale is upside down. The brighter the star is, the lower--or, if it goes through 0, the more negative the number becomes. Minus 1 is a brighter star than 0. 0 is a brighter star than 2; 2 is a brighter star than 5, and so forth. So, low numbers are bright. The magnitude of the Sun, obviously extremely bright when we look at it, turns out to be -26.5. And the magnitude of the faintest star that can be seen with the Hubble Telescope is about +30, which is incredibly faint.
And that, by the way, is why, again, why logarithms are such good news. Because the entire range of things we can see in the sky goes from -26 to +30. Those are numbers you can get your mind around. In fact, the difference in brightness between those things is a number that I can't even pronounce. And so, much easier to deal with magnitudes. All right.
Chapter 5. Absolute and Apparent Magnitude [00:38:06]
Now, that has to do with how bright things are, how bright things appear to be, or how bright they are. But remember what we're trying to do. We're trying to compare how bright something is, intrinsically, to how bright it looks. And this gets you into the question of--there are actually two kinds of magnitude. The intrinsic brightness of an object is something called absolute magnitude,[dd] whereas the observed brightness is referred to as apparent magnitude[de]. And now, the astronomers screw you up again, because we have different symbols for the apparent magnitude and the absolute magnitude. The absolute magnitude is given a symbol capital M, and the apparent magnitude is given the symbol smallm. And the problem is that you can't actually tell the difference between those two in my handwriting, and probably yours as well. So, this leads to untold confusion, but that's the way life is. And the relationship between these two has to relate to distance.
Okay. Before we get there, the definition of absolute magnitude. You'll notice that in the previous comparison of Sirius to Vega, I was talking about apparent magnitude. How bright it looks in the sky. Absolute magnitude is defined as the apparent magnitude if the object in question were exactly 10 parsecs away. So, the Sun has an apparent magnitude, as I said before, -26.5, but it's actually not that bright of a star. If you took the Sun out to a distance of 10 parsecs, its magnitude would be 4.7, which is among the fainter stars you could see in the sky. And so, the absolute magnitude of the Sun is 4.7, even though its apparent magnitude is - 26.5.
So, it turns, for example, that the star Sirius is about 3 parsecs away. And so--oh, I haven't told you an important thing yet. We'll come back to this in a second, though. The problem set problem obviously is going to be what is the absolute magnitude of Sirius, but I have to write down the formula first.
Little m, that's the apparent magnitude, minus big M, that's the absolute magnitude, is equal to 5 times the logarithm of the distance over 10 parsecs. Now, notice what happens. If the distance is equal to 10 parsecs, then you've got the log of 1. What's the log of 1? Zero. Thank you very much. Because this is the log of 100. log 100 = 0. And so, if the log of this thing is 0, then this right-hand side is 0. So, at a distance of 10 parsecs, the apparent magnitude is equal to the absolute magnitude, because m - M = 0, which is exactly what the definition was. So, that works.
So, example. Sirius. So, what is the absolute magnitude of Sirius? All right. Here we go. The apparent magnitude, we figured out just a minute ago, is - 5⁄4, minus the absolute magnitude, which is what we're trying to figure out. 5 log (3 /10), which is ⅓, which is equal to 5 log(10-½). 3 = 10½; ⅓ = 10-½, which is - 5⁄2. That 5 comes from here. The -½ comes from here. So, M = 5⁄2, let's see, minus 5⁄4, is equal to 5⁄4. And that is the absolute magnitude. I'm sorry. Oh you want me to do--okay, sure. So, we okay to here?
Student: [Inaudible]
Professor Charles Bailyn: So oh, oh, okay, fine. Log of--this is actually an important point. Log(⅓), that's what we're going to try and do, is equal to log (1/10½). 1/10n = 10-n. That's the key thing. And so, this is the log of 10 to the minus one half [log(10-½)] That, then, means that 5 log (⅓) = 5 x (-½) = - 5⁄2. Yes?
Student: [Inaudible]
Professor Charles Bailyn: There are no units--yeah, magnitudes are just numbers. Yes?
Student: [Inaudible]
Professor Charles Bailyn: Ah, well, what I did--sorry, I skipped a step. To start from that. -5⁄4 - M = -5⁄2. So, I multiply both sides by negative 1, then I subtract 5⁄4 from both sides.
You got to keep the minus signs straight. The easiest way to make mistakes in this is to get the thing upside down and lose track of where your minus signs are, which is really easy to do, because the whole scale is backwards. So, you know, -5⁄4 is bright, whereas 5⁄4 is faint. And so, you're--one is constantly getting these things upside down. Be careful. Look at your answers to see it makes sense. If some incredibly faint galaxy turns out to have a magnitude of -50, that's almost certainly wrong, because that's much brighter than the Sun.
All right. So, now. Now, we can actually do the Standard Candle Method. Here's the key problem. If you observe a star like Sirius and you--I don't know, you take its spectrum, or some alien comes down and tells you this star is just like Sirius, or however you work this out. If you observe a star like Sirius and measure its apparent magnitude to be 8.75, how far away is it? And now, we're back to where we were twenty minutes ago, before I started all this nonsense. Namely, we're trying to measure the distance of something, which was the whole purpose, as you may recall. So, how far away is it? Let's see.
m - M = 5 log (D /10 parsecs). The apparent magnitude is 8.75. The absolute magnitude, we just figured out, is 5⁄4--1.25--is equal to 5 log (D / 10 pc). And you'll notice I've chosen my numbers carefully, because this is going to work out well. This is 7.5, and I'm going to divide both sides by 5; 7.5 / 5 = log (D / 10 pc).
Or, 1.5 = log (D / 10 pc). Now what do I do? Yeah, exactly. You have to take 10 to the power of both sides. Whenever you're stuck with log of something and you don't want the log of the something, you want the actual something itself, what you got to do is 101.5 = 10log (D/10pc). Ten to the log of anything is equal to itself. So, this is D / 10 parsecs. And thus, what's 101.5?
Student: Thirty.
Professor Charles Bailyn: Thirty, yes.
101.5 = 101 x 10½ = 3 x 101 = 30.
So, 30 = D / 10 parsecs. And D is equal to 300 parsecs. And for the person who asked about units, which was a very good question, this is where the units come back. It's because there's this 10 parsecs embedded inside the equation. And so, the unit of length comes back here.
Chapter 6. Conclusion [00:48:04]
And so, that's how you measure distance. You know how bright something is, probably by having looked at some other, more nearby example. You measure how bright it looks. You compare those two things, and out pops the distance. So, this is done, usually, in the form of what's called the distance ladder, which we will talk about much more in section. So, you'll get many more opportunities to do this.
Nearby stars, you measure the distance in parallax--from the parallax method. Then you find examples of similar stars. You measure the apparent magnitude. You assume the absolute magnitude to be the same as the absolute magnitude for things you already know the distance to. You assume the absolute magnitude. And you compute the distance. This, then, gets you new--this tells you that you learned from this, the absolute magnitudes of brighter things. Not just stars, but whole galaxies, supernovae, all sorts of things--brighter things, which you can then measure further away.
And just to conclude, you can see pretty clearly that this method is fraught with potential problems. Because every time you go through this--you know, that's a swear word in science. You're making an assumption, and that assumption can lead you astray. And so, the whole history of cosmology, since 1925, is in that word. Assuming the absolute magnitude of things for which you're trying to measure the distance, so you can put them on the Hubble Diagram, so that you can deduce the rate of expansion of the Universe, and thus its age and ultimate fate. So, it all rests on this little point embedded inside the Standard Candle Method, which will be discussed at great length. Okay, that's it for today.
[end of transcript]